TITLE: THE SAME SUBJECT CONTINUED

Narada said:—Moreover, the nooses made by Mura have been cut, Nisumva
and Naraka have been slain and the road to the city of Pragyotish has
been freed from all dangers. Even the proud kings of the world have been
frightened in battle by this descendant of Shura (Krishna) with the
twang of his bow and the sound of his conch-shell Panchajanya. Having
vanquished easily the highly powerful Rukshmi well protected by the
Decean car-warriors resembling clouds, the foremost of Vrishnis Keshava
carried away Rukshmini (1–3). Afterwards Hari, the holder of
conch-shell, discus and club, brought Bhoja’s daughter into his house in
a car effulgent like the sun and producing a rattle like unto the
muttering of clouds and married her. In the city of Jāruthi he defeated
Ahdriti, Kratha and Shishupala and vanquished Dantavakra and Shatadhanwā
with all their soldiers. Worked up with anger the beautiful lord of
Shoubha killed Shālwa, grasping firmly a bow, the Yavana Indradyumna and
Kasherunām. Having scattered thousands of mountains the lotus-eyed
Purusottama struck Dyumutsena with his discus. In the city of Irāvati on
the summit of the mount Mahendra there lived two followers of Rāvana
Gopati and Tālaketu, who could disappear form view within the twinkling
of an eye and were effulgent like sun and fire. The foremost of men,
Keshava, the holder of Srānga bow, killed them both, within the
twinkling of an eye, the Dānavas Hansa and Dimvaka have been also slain
by Krishna with their followers. Vārānashi (Benares) has been burnt down
by the high souled Keshava and the king with his followers has been
slain (4-11). Having killed Maya in battle with knotty arrows Krishna,
of wonderful deeds, has released the son of Indrasena (12). The highly
powerful Varuna, with all the acquatic animals, has been defeated in
battle by Krishna repairing to Lohitakuta (under water) (13). Having
gone to Indra’s palace, he, although prevented by the highly powerful
celestials, disregarding their king, carried away the Pārijāta tree
(14). The intelligent Janārddana has slain the kings of Pandya,
Poundrya, Kalinga, Matsa and Banga (15). Having killed hundreds of
highly powerful kings he married his beautiful queen Gāndhāri. But the
Lord Madhusudana has crowned the foremost of Bharatas, Arjuna, the
holder of Gāndiva bow who used to play before Kunti, with success
(16–17). This foremost of men has defeated, in battle, Drona, Drauni,
Karna, Bhishma, Suyodhana and other warriors. For pleasing Vabhru the
powerful Hari, the holder of conch-shell, discus and club, carried away
by force the daughter of the king of Suveera (18-19). When Venudāri
trampled over the entire earth with his horses, cars and elephants
Purusottama defeated him with great care (20). Acquiring, by his ascetic
penances, energy, strength and power in his pristine dwarfish form
Mādhava stole away from Bali the three worlds. Even when he was attacked
in the city of Prāgyotish by the Dānavas with thunderbolts, clubs and
swords Death could not near him (20-22). Bali’s son, the highly
powerful, energetic and rich Bāna has been defeated by Krishna with all
his followers. The highly powerful Janārddana has killed Peetha,
Paithika and Asitomā the courtiers of the long-armed Kansa (23–24). The
highly illustrious Mādhava, the foremost of men, has killed the Daityas
Jambha, Airāvata and Virupa, assuming the semblance of a man (25).
Having defeated in water the highly powerful Nāga king Kālya, the
lotus-eyed (Krishna) has despatched him to the sea (26). Having
vanquished Vivaswān’s son Yama, Hari, the foremost of men, has restored
to life the dead son of Sāndipani (27). O Emperor Janamejaya, in this
way, this high-souled one chastises those wicked souls who injure the
Brāhmanas and the gods. Having slain Bhumi’s son Naraka he has brought
the pair of ear-rings and given them to the mother of gods for pleasing
the holder of thunder-bolt (28–29). The highly illustrious Lord Vishnu,
the master of all the worlds, is a terror to the Daityas and declares
fearlessness to the celestials (30). Having established virtue amongst
the mortals by performing various sacrifices and accomplished the great
work of the gods he will return to his own region. Then the highly
illustrious Krishna will make the ocean devour the cities Bhogavati, a
favourite resort of the Rishis, and Dwārakā (31–33). This city of
Dwārakā, filled with various jewels and sacrificial grounds, will enter,
with its gardens, into the abode (sea) of Varuna (33). The ocean,
conversant with the desire of Krishna, the holder of Shrānga bow, will
inundate this city of Dwārakā constructed by Vāsudeva and resembling the
residence of the sun. There is none amongst the gods, Asuras, and men
and none will be, except the slayer of Madhu, who will be able to live
here (34–37).

Having thus instituted many excellent regulations amongst the Dāshārhas
Vishnu himself will be united with Nārāyana, Shoma and Surya. He is
incomparable, above the reach of thought, can go any where at will and
has control over his senses. As a boy plays with a toy so he sports with
these creatures (36–37). None can measure the large-armed slayer of
Madhu; there is nothing similar or otherwise with his universal form
(38). In this way he has been eulogised hundreds and thousands of times.
But none has been able to see the end of his works. Beholding with his
eyes, rendered more powerful by ascetic penances, the deeds which the
lotus-eyed Keshava performed with Sangkarshana’s help in his boyhood,
the highly intelligent and the great Yogin Vyasa, the witness of all,
had already narrated them all (39-41).

Vaishampāyana said:—Having thus chanted the glories of Govinda at the
mandate of the king of gods, the celestial saint Nārada, adored by the
Yadavas, repaired to the celestial region (42). Thereupon the lotus-eyed
slayer of Madhu, Govinda, distributed those riches and jewels duly
amongst the Vrishnis and Andhakas. Having obtained them the high-souled
Yadavas too began to perform sacrifices with profuse presents and live
in the city of Dwarakā (43-44).