TITLE: THE CELESTIAL SWANS GO TO THE CITY OF VAJRA

Vaishampāyana said:—O king, from before the swans used to go to the city
of Vajra. So hearing the words of Vāsava they at once went there (1). O
hero, those birds jumped into the charming tanks filled with golden
lotuses and lilies which could be touched. Although they had come many a
time before they now astonished all with their polished and sweet words
(2-3). O king Janamejaya, speaking in sweet words those celestial swans
ranged in the tanks of Vajranābha’s inner appartment and became his
great favorites. He then said to those Dhārtarāstras the following words
(4-5). "You speak these sweet words because you always live in the
celestial region. Come here always whenever you will know of a great
festival in my house. O swans living in the celestial region, regard
this house of mine as your own and enter here confidently" (6–7). O
descendant of Bharata, thus addressed by Vajranābha those birds entered
into the palace of the king of Dānavas: for the work of the gods they
spoke like men and made acquaintance with all speaking various words
(8–9). At that time the women, who were living in the palaces of Kashya
pa’s sons (Dānavas) partakers of all forms of blessings, attained to
great delight on hearing of that beautiful account of the swans (10).

Thus ranging in the inner appartment of Vajranābha, the swans saw his
beautiful and smiling daughter Prabhāvati and made her acquaintance
(11). Amongst them the goose Shuchimukhi contracted friendship with the
princess of charming smiles (12). Relating hundreds of beautiful stories
Shuchimukhi created the confidence of Vajranābha’s daughter and one day
she said to her (13). "O Prabhāvati, I consider you the most beautiful
in the three worlds as regards your beauty, character and
accomplishments. I wish to tell you some thing (14). O you of beautiful
smiles, your youth is almost gone: that which is gone does not return
like the water of a stream (15). There is no other happiness to women
greater than enjoyment with men in this world. I tell you the truth, O
auspicious lady (16). O you of fair limbs, although ordered by your
father to make a free choice, why do you not select one of the gods or
Asuras as your husband? (17) O youthful lady, many a bridegroom, endued
with beauty, heroism and other accomplishments, come here and go away
disregarded. O lady, when you do not like a bridegroom becoming your
family and beauty, why should then, O you of fair limbs, Rukshmini’s son
Pradyumna, who has none in the three worlds equal to him, in bravery,
accomplishments, pedigree and beauty, come here (18-20)? O you of a
beautiful waist, although he is a man of men, that highly powerful and
virtuous-souled one shines like a god amongst the gods and like one of
them amongst the Dānavas (21). Seeing him the women cannot cheque their
natural love as the cow cannot cheque its milk and the stream its water
(22). I dare not compare his face with the full-moon, his eyes with
lotuses and his gait with that of a lion (23). O fair lady, what more
shall I say? The powerful Lord Vishnu, having brought Cupid (_the
limbless god, Ananga_) under his subjection as one of his limbs, has
created him as his son, extracting the very essence of the world (24).
He was stolen away, in his childhood, by the sinful demon Shamvara:
having slain him and kept his character unscathed he learnt all his
illusory powers (25). All the accomplishments, that are worthy of being
sought for in the three worlds, and all those that you can imagine,
exist in Pradyumna. In his effulgence he is like fire, in patience he is
like earth, in lustre he is like a lake." Hearing it Prabhāvati said to
Suchimukhi (26–27):

"O gentle lady, I have heard many a time from the conversation between
my father and the intelligent Nārada that Vishnu is living in the land
of men (28). With burning cars, Shrānga (bow) and club he has consumed
the races of the Daityas. O honourable lady, he is the great enemy of
the sons of Diti and should be shunned by them. The king of Danavas
collects information about Vishnu from the Asuras who live in the branch
cities for his well-being. O you of sweet smiles, every woman wishes
that the family of her husband may be superior to that of her father. If
you however can find out any means for bringing him here you will show
me a great favour and purify our family. I ask you, O you of sweet
words, tell me how Pradyumna, born in the family of Vrishnis, may become
my husband. I have learnt from the conversation of elderly Asura women
that Hari is a great enemy of the Daityas and gives them great trouble.
I had heard before how Pradyumna was born and how the powerful Shamvara
was killed by him. What more shall I say? Pradyumna is always present in
my heart. But the means by which I may be united with him is solely
wanted. O friend, learned you are no doubt; still as a maid servant of
yours, I appoint you as my emissary. Point out to me the means by which
I may be united with him." Thereupon consoling her Suchimukhi smilingly
said:—(29–38).

"O you of sweet smiles, I will go there as your emissary and communicate
to him your great devotion (39). O you of beautiful waist, O you of
sweet smiles, I will so exert that he may come here and you may become
the consort of Cupid (40). O you of fair eyes, regard what I have said
as true. Communicate to your father that I speak cleverly; you will reap
a great benefit therefrom".

Thus spoken to by the goose Prabhāvati acted accordingly. The king of
Dānavas said to the goose in his inner apartment. "O beautiful
Suchimukhi, Prabhāvati has communicated to me about your cleverness in
speaking. Do you describe to us becoming stories. Tell us what wonders
you have seen in this world, not seen before by any and whether worthy
or unworthy of being seen by others." O king, the goose then said to
Vajranābha (41–45).

"O foremost of Dānavas, I have seen an intelligent saintly lady, by name
Shāndili, perform a wonderful feat by the side of the mount Sumeru (46).
That Shandili, the good friend of the auspicious daughter of the
mountain chief (Uma) is large-minded and a great benefactress of the
world (47). I have also seen the auspicious actor, who has obtained a
boon from the Munis, who can assume shapes at his will, who always gives
food to all in the three worlds and is liked by all. O sinless hero,
that actor travels always in Uttarakuru, the island of Kalamra,
Bhadrāshwa, Ketumal, and other islands. He knows many songs and dances
of the gods and Gandharvas. And with his dancing he surprises the gods
(48–50)."

Vajranabha said:—"O goose, I had heard of this many a time before. The
high-souled Siddhas and Chāranas had mentioned this to me (51). O
daughter of a bird, I am also stricken with curiosity for seeing that
actor who has obtained this boon. But there is none to speak of those
accomplishments of mine to him, hearing which he will come to me (52)".

The goose said:—O foremost of Asuras, that actor is an appreciator of
merits. Hearing of accomplished persons he travels over the seven
insular continents. O great Asura, if he hears of your great
accomplishments, know him as already arrived here (53-54).

Vajranabha said:—"O auspicious daughter of a bird, O goose! may good
betide you. Do you so arrange that the actor may come here" (55).

Thus despatched on an errand by Vajranābha, the swans went to Krishna
and the king of gods and communicated to them every thing (56). Hearing
it Adhokshaja engaged Pradyumna in the work of acquiring Prabhāvati and
killing Vajranābha (57). O descendant of Bharata, resorting to his
celestial Māyā Hari sent the Bhaimas there disguised as actors (58).

They dressed Pradyumna as the hero, Shāmva as his fool, Gada as his
companion and dressed other Bhaimas with becoming dresses. Leading
dancing girls were the fit heroines of that party. The actor Bhadra and
his party were also suitably dressed. Thereupon ascending the cars
driven by Pradyumna, the great car-warrior Yadavas set out on the
mission of the highly powerful celestials. O king, at that time they all
assumed the semblances of men and women as necessary though they were
men. Thereupon they arrived at Supura, a dependant city of Vajra
(59–63).