TITLE: KRISHNA INVITES A MEETING OF HIS KINSMEN

Vaishampāyana said:—Thereupon having honored Garuda like his friend
Vāsudeva took him to his own house. Having saluted Janārddana that
sky-ranging bird, with his permission, rose up into the sky. At that
time, having agitated completely the ocean, the abode of Makaras, with
the wind caused by the flapping of his wings the bird flew towards the
eastern sea (1–3). Saying "I will again come at the time of work"
Vinatā’s son departed. Krishna honored, with jewels acquired by his own
prowess, his old father Anakadundubhi, the king Ugrasena, Baladeva,
Satyaki Sāndipani, the Brāhmana Gārgya, and other members of the
Vrishni, Andhaka and Bhoja races. The ambassadors, adorned with
ear-rings and garlands, announced at the crossings and high ways of
Dwārakā:—"The enemies of the Brāhnanas have been slain: the slayer of
Madhu has returned unscathed from the battle-field and the Vrishnis and
Andhakas have acquired victory" (4–8).

Afterwards having saluted Sāndipani first Janārddana bowed unto the king
Ahuka. Thereupon with Rāma, Vāsava’s younger brother saluted his father,
with tears in his eyes, whose heart was filled with joy. Afterwards
approaching the Dāshārhas and calling every one of them by name
Adhokshaja honored them all. O descendant of Bharata, after showing
these civilities all the Yadavas, headed by Upendra, sat on celestial
thrones set with jewels of every description. Afterwards, commanded by
Krishna, Naraka’s servants brought there the riches and the
assembly-hall which they had brought before. Thereupon blowing his
bugle, Janārddana, the foremost of Yadus, honored all the Dāshārhas
(9-14).

Thereupon according to Krishna’s order the Dāshārhas entered into the
assembly-hall, charming, having seats and a door made of jewels. As the
cave of a mountain is inhabited by lions so that assembly-hall, filled
with the leading Yadu chiefs, shone superbly beautiful. Govinda,
followed by the Vrishnis and Bhojas, placing Ugrasena before him, sat
with Rama on the huge golden seat. Welcoming all the Yadu chiefs who
were seated there according to their age the foremost of Purushas said
(15-18).