TITLE: AN ACCOUNT OF VENA AND PRITHU

Vaishampāyana said:—Formerly the Patriarch Anga, born in the race of
Atri, and equally all-powerful like him, became the protector of
religion (1). A highly impious son by name Vena was born to him. That
Patriarch was begotten on Sunithā the daughter of Death (2). Imbibing
the defect of his maternal grand-father, that son of Kāla’s daughter
deviated from his own duties and preached freedom of conduct in the
world (3). That king established an irreligious order and disregarding
Vedic observances he engaged in impious actions (4). During his
administration the study of the Vedas and the performance of the Vedic
rites were suspended. And the celestials did not get Soma juice
consecrated in Yajnas (5). Such was the dreadful promise of the
Patriarch that no one would perform, even at the time of destruction,
either Homa or Yajna (6). O foremost of Kurus, (he said) I am worthy of
being adored, I am the agent of Yajna, I am identical with Yajna—you
should dedicate all your Yajnas and Homas unto me (7). Beholding him
thus transgress the order and partake unduly and unfairly of the
sacrificial offerings the great Rishis, headed by Marichi, said (8):–"We
shall enter upon the initiation ceremony for many long years—therefore
do not act irreligiously, O Vena, for such is the eternal religion (9).
After the death of Atri you have forsooth been born as a Patriarch. And
you made the contract that you would govern the subjects" (10). After
they had said this the wicked and ill-disposed Vena, laughing, said to
all those great Rishis, the following evil words (11). Vena said "Who
else will be the founder of religion? Whom shall I hear? Who else is
superior to me on this earth in learning, energy, prowess, asceticism
and truth (12)? All creatures and especially all forms of religion have
originated from me. You are all stupid and void of consciousness and
therefore you do not know me (13). If I wish I can burn down the earth
or overflow it with water. I can obstruct the heaven and earth: there is
no need of discussing it (14)". When the noble Rishis could not make
Vena humble on account of his pride and egotism, they, worked up with
anger, belaboured that highly powerful king and began to churn his left
thigh (15–16). When the thigh of that king was thus churned there arose
from it a greatly short and dark person (17). O Janamejaya, he stood
there, stricken with fear and folding his arms. Beholding him thus
possessed by fear Atri said to him "Nishida" _Sit down_ (18). O foremost
of speakers, he became the originator of the race of Nishadas (hunters)
and procreated the race of fishermen begotten of the sins of Vena (19).
And Tukhāras, Tumuras and other races taking delight in impiety who live
on the Vindhya mountain were also born of Vena (20). Thereupon, those
high-souled Rishis, worked up with anger, began to churn the right arm
of Vena like a piece of wood used for kindling fire (21). From that arm
originated Prithu resembling the very flame, and burning in effulgence
like the fire itself (22). The highly illustrious Prithu was born with
his most excellent prime bow _Ajagava_, heavenly arrows and a highly
lustrous coat of mail to protect his body (23-24). At his birth all the
creatures were filled with delight and Vena too, O monarch, repaired to
the celestial region (25). O descendant of Kuru, the great Prithu, a
good son, being born he saved Vena from the hell called _Put_¹¹ (26).
Taking all the jewels the oceans came to him with water for his
installation (27). The Divine Brahmā with the Devas, the offspring of
Angiras, and all other creatures, mobile and immobile, came there and
installed the effulgent king, the son of Vena, the lord of an extensive
kingdom (28-29). The highly energetic and powerful son of Vena, Prithu,
was installed as the first king by the leading Rishis conversant with
the Vedas and other scriptures (30) By him were pleased the subjects who
had been dissatisfied by his father. On account of his being the object
of their love he was called Rājā (king) (31). When he used to make a
voyage in the ocean the water used be grow hard as land and the
mountains made way for him and the branches of the trees were not broken
down (32). The earth grew easy of production and yielded articles of
food as soon as thought of. The kine gave milk whenever milched and
honey grew in every leaf (33). In the meantime at the sacred Yajna of
Brahmā, was born the highly intelligent Suta (34). At that great Yajna
was also born the wise Māgadha. They were invited by the celestial
saints for chanting the glories of Prithu (35). All the Rishis said to
them "Do ye sing the glories of this king. This is a work that befits
you and this king too is also an worthy subject for it (36)". Then Suta
and Māgadha said to all those Rishis:—"We shall, with our own actions,
delight the gods and Rishis (37). O ye twice born ones, we are not
cognizant of the actions, characteristics and fame of this energetic
king. How shall we then chant his glories (38)?" They were then engaged
by the Rishis (to chant his glories) saying "Do ye chant his glories by
the deeds which the highly powerful Prithu did in the previous Kalpa
(39). This king speaks truth, has a good character, keeps his promise,
is modest, does good unto all, is forgiving, powerful, represses the
wicked, observes his duties, is grateful, merciful, always speaks sweet
words and respects those who deserve it, performs Yajnas, is devoted to
Brāhmanas, is of a quiet temperament, and observes the rules of
society." Since then, O Janmejaya, at the time of chanting glories Sutas
and Māgadhas (panegyrists) pour their benedictions in this world
(40-42). Being highly pleased with their eulogy the king Prithu
conferred upon Suta the province of Arupa, and on Māgadha, that of
Magadha (43). Thereat delighted the great Rishis and the subjects said
"The king will forsooth grant us maintenances in abundance (44)".
Thereupon at the words of the great saints, the subjects approached the
son of Vena and begged of him their maintenances (45). Thus approached
by his subjects and with a view to do them good the powerful king took
up his bow and assailed the earth (46). Thereupon assuming the form of a
cow the earth fled away in fear of Vena’s son. Prithu too, taking up his
bow, pursued her (47). Traversing the region of Brahmā and all other
regions in fear of Vena’s son she saw him everywhere before her with the
bow in his hand (48). He looked effulgent like the burning eternal fire
with his sharpened arrows and even the immortals could not repress that
high-souled one (49). Even when repairing to the region of Brahmā she
could not find safety; the earth, adored even by the three worlds with
folded hands then said to the son of Vena:—"You should not perpetrate
the iniquity of slaying a woman. Without me, how will you be able, O
king, to protect your subjects (50-51). O king, all the worlds are
situated on me, and this universe is sustained by me. Know this, O king,
that with my destruction all the creatures will be destroyed (52). O
king, if you wish to encompass the well being of your subjects it does
not behove you to kill me. Listen to these words of mine (53). If works
are undertaken commensurate with their means they are crowned with
success. Do you, O king, find out the means by which you will protect
your subjects (54). By slaying me, O king, you will not be able to
protect your subjects by any means. O you of great effulgence, I will
find it out; do you restrain your anger (55). Even women of inferior
births should not be slain. Therefore, O king, you should not forsake
your morality (56)."

Hearing those various words of the earth the high-souled and pious king,
restraining his anger, said to her (57).

¹¹ It is a hell where all those who have no son born to them go after
 death. It is for this that the Hindus look so eagerly to the birth
 of a son.