TITLE: THE HISTORY OF THE PARIJATA TREE THE COLOQUY BETWEEN

KRISHNA AND NARADA.

Vaishampāyana said:—The almighty Vishnu, that possessor of immeasurable
powers then finding that the sage Nārada was desirous of departing,
spoke to him thus (1):—"O sinless and mighty sage, conversant with the
truth of all religions, having repaired to heaven and there interviewed
the courtiers of that intelligent slayer of Tripura (2), remind
Pakasasana of all our ancient brotherly love that thou knowest—inform
him not as my command but as my request, (3) that the Pārijāta tree
which the illustrious and virtuous Kasyapa that foremost of sages
created in days gone by for the sake of Aditi’s happiness, (4) that most
excellent of all trees that bestows religious merit, and unbounded
prosperity, that tree that was given to thee away as a gift by the very
virtuous goddesses in fulfilment of their vows for the furtherance of
their religious merits—inform him that my wives also hearing of the
presentation of that tree, desire to give it away, O lord, for earning
virtue and religious merit consequent on munificent deeds and also, for
my gratification. Ask him therefore to send down to Dwarvati that best
of all trees the Pārijāta; and it shall be restored to heaven after the
ceremony of presentation is over. The almighty God the slayer of Vala
should thus be spoken to by thee (5-8). O foremost of sages thou shalt
also so put forth thy endeavours that the lord of the immortals be
persuaded to give over the excellent Parijata tree (9), O possessor of
ascetic wealth, this will also bring into prominence what ambassadorial
abilities thou dost possess; I know that it is possible for all thine
acts to be attended with success" (20).

Thus spoken to by Narayana, the almighty sage Narada that great
possessor of ascetic merit smiled and spoke these words to the slayer of
Kesin (11):—"Very well,—I shall thus speak to the lord of the gods, O
foremost of Yadus, but I am sure he will never part with the Parijata
tree (12). The Danavas and the gods obtained this Parijata tree by
throwing the Mandara mountain into the waters of the ocean²⁸⁶ (13).

"O Janarddana, at that time the creator of the worlds desired to take
away the Parijata tree together with that best of mountains, the Mandara
(14). Thereupon Sakra personally going to Sankara told him:—’This is
Sachi’s sporting tree, and may be allowed to remain in her gardens’.
Thus did he entreat Sankara (15). Mahadeva granted him the boon saying
’Let it be so then’ and O sinless one, he did not also bring the
Parijata tree to the beautiful cave-decked Mandara mountain (16). O
mighty armed one, thus in days past, under the pretext that the Parijata
is Sachi’s tree of sport, did Indra save it from the clutches of
Mahadeva (17). Afterwards Hara, in order to please his wife Umā, created
on the dales of the Mandara mountain a forest of the Parijata trees
extending over full four miles (18).

"In that best of forests, O Krishna, neither the rays of the sun, nor
the cool beams of the moon, nor even the breaths of the wind can
penetrate (19). Through the powers of Mahadeva that forest is
self-luminous, and heat and cold reign there at the pleasure of the
mountain’s daughter (Durga) (20). Excepting the mighty god and goddess
and their followers and myself, O delighter of the Yadus, nobody under
any circumstances, can enter that charming wood (21). O descendant of
the Vrishnis, there the Pārijātas shower all kinds of best gems and
jewels on all sides, even as soon as they are merely thought of in the
mind (22). O Keshava, with the permission of that godhead, that
protector of the worlds, troops of the illustrious attendants of Siva,
also enjoy that beautiful forest (23). This forest of Pārijāta trees,
their fruits, their brightness and their qualities exceed by far those
of the Pārijātas of the heaven (24). When, O Keshava, that God whose
emblem is the sacred bull, repairs with Uma and his attendants, among
them, these trees approach him in worship assuming human shapes (25).
Those trees on the Mandara infused with the energy of Rudra, free from
all adverse influences and attended with all prosperity, are very dear
to the daughter of the mountain (26). Once upon a time a mighty and
dreadful Daitya of cruel motives by name Andhaka, who was puffed up with
arrogance through the virtues of a boon obtained by him ventured to
transgress into that forest (27). He was slain by that slayer of foes
that foremost of gods Hara, although he was ten times as powerful as
Vritra and incapable of being slain by any created being (28). O
lotus-eyes God! I tell thee truly, that the thousand eyed god Indra will
never give thee, the Parijāta tree obtained with great difficulty (29).
That best of trees always bestows on the goddess Sachi all her desires,
as well as, O Krishna, it fulfils the wishes of the highly powerful
Indra" (30).

The auspicious god said:—O sage! That the mighty and intelligent
Mahadeva did not take away the Parijāta tree out of consideration for
Sachi, was quite worthy of him (31). I think that it was quite in
keeping with the high estimation in which that infallible being, that
origin of the worlds, that supreme and most ancient creator is held
(32). But, O illustrious sage, O most pious one, I am younger than that
slayer of Vala, and ought to be cherished by him like (his son) Jayanta
(33). O thou of ascetic wealth, it is thy duty to preserve between us
(me and Indra) amicable relations by all means; and I ask thee to do so,
because I know thee to be able to do so (34). I have promised, O sage,
that for the accomplishment of Satyabhama’s _Punyaka_ vow, I shall, O
lord, bring down the Parijata tree from heaven (35). How can I be able
now, O sage, to break that promise of mine, O sinless one, as I have
never before O twice-born one, spoken falsehood (36)? If I were to break
my promise, the worlds will then meet with their ends,²⁸⁷ for, O
foremost of the sages, it is my duty to protect the virtue and the good
qualities of the people. He on whom every one depends, how can he speak
untruth (37)? Neither gods, nor the Gandharvas, nor the Rakshasas, nor
the Asuras nor Jakshas, nor Pannagas, shall be able to frustrate my
promise; this I tell thee truly, and may fortune attend thee. O sage
(38)! If that lord of the immortals do not give the Parijata tree at thy
request, I shall then hurl my mace at his breast besmeared by Sachi with
fragrant ointments (39). He is also to be informed by thee that if he
refuses to part with the Parijata tree when requested in this
conciliatory manner, let him rest assured about a visit from me there,
and let him prepare for it (40).

²⁸⁶ This surely refers to the churning of the ocean by the gods and
 Asuras.

²⁸⁷ As everybody would then speak falsehood, and truth will be
 vanished from the face of the earth.