TITLE: ARJUNA GOES TO RESCUE THE BRAHMANA AND BECOMES

UNSUCCESSFUL.

Arjuna said:—O foremost of the Bharata race, within a moment we reached
the boundary of the village and encamped because all our animals were
tired (1). O descendant of Kuru, a few moments after encircled by the
huge Vrishni army I entered into the city (2). At that time all was
ablaze and burning vultures and beasts frighted me (3). Huge and black
fire-brands fell down, the sun was shorn of its effulgence and the earth
trembled (4). Beholding those dreadful and hair-stirring evil omens, I,
filled with anxiety, ordered my soldiers to get ready. Hearing it the
great car warriors of the Vrishni and Andhaka families headed by
Yuyudhana got ready their respective cars and I too put on my arms
(5–6).

After the expiration of the mid-night that Brāhmana, stricken with fear,
approached us and said "My wife is on the point of giving birth to a
child. Do you station yourselves so that I may not be cheated" (7-8). In
a moment, O king, piteous cries were heard in the Brāhmana’s house
exclaiming "Stolen! Stolen!" (9). Afterwards we also heard the cries of
the baby in the sky, but could not see the Rākshasa (10). Afterwards we
agitated all the quarters with a downpour of arrows, but the boy was
however stolen away (11). When that boy was stolen away that Brāhmana
crying addressed to us such harsh words that the Vrishnis lost
themselves and I too lost my senses. He particularly said to me:—"You
said that you would protect me, but could not do so. Therefore listen to
these beneficial words, O wicked minded wretch (12–14). You always vaunt
with Keshava of incomparable intellect. Had Govinda been here this
mischief would not have been created. O stupid man, as a saviour is
entitled to the one-fourth share of the virtue, so he, who cannot
protect one, is constrained to participate of the sin; you said that you
would protect me but you have not been able to do so. In vain is your
Gāndiva, prowess and fame" (15-17).

However I did not speak anything to the Brāhmana, but went with the
princes of the Vrishni and Andhaka families where the highly effulgent
Krishna was. Afterwards going to city of Dwāravati I saw Govinda the
slayer of Madhu and he too, saw me, filled with shame and sorrow.
Beholding me ashamed Mādhava consoled me and the Brāhmana with sweet
words. Thereupon he said to Dāruka:—"Get ready my horses, Sugriva,
Saivya, Meghapushpa, and Balāhaka." Afterwards making the Brāhmana
ascend the car and sending down Dāruka, Shura’s descendant Krishna asked
me to act as the charioteer. O descendant of Kuru, afterwards, Krishna,
the Brāhmana and myself set out on that car towards the north (18-20).