TITLE: AN ACCOUNT OF THE RAINY SEASON

Vaishampayana said:—Thus living in Vrindāvana the two highly beautiful
sons of Vasudeva began to range there tending kine (2). Sporting with
the milk-men and bathing in the river Yamunā they spent the summer there
happily (2). Thereupon with the advent of the rainy season that creates
desire in the mind of men, clouds, containing rainbow, began to
discharge their watery contents (3). The sun was enshrouded by the
scattering clouds drawing in new water. The ground was rendered
invisible by the new grown grass (4). With her surface brushed by the
new clouds the earth appeared like a youthful damsel (5). Watered by the
new showers, the forests and the forest-roads were divested of dust and
filled with _Sakragopas_²⁰⁷ (6). This was the dancing season of the
peacocks emitting sweet notes. And elated with passion they began to
pour their _Kekā_ notes (7). The clouds began to embellish the persons
of the beautiful Kadamva flowers, that had attained their youth in the
wonderful rainy season and which is the only food of the bees (8). The
forest was scented with the fragrance of Kadamva²⁰⁸ flowers and rendered
smiling by the Kutaja²⁰⁹ flowers. Its heat was destroyed by the clouds
and the earth was satisfied by the showers of rain. Being sprinkled with
water by the clouds the mountains, that had been scorched by the rays of
the sun and the forest were, as it were, emitting smokes. With terrible
winds and huge clouds rising in the sky the earth assumed the appearance
of the city of a great king (9-10). Adorned hither and thither with
Kadamba and plantain flowers, that forest, abounding in delightful Nipa
trees, shone there like the burning fire (11). Smelling the fragrance of
the earth wet with the showers of Indra, and scattered by the wind the
people were stricken with desire (12). The earth was filled with the
notes of the maddened bees, the sound of the frogs and the wonderful
_Kekā_ notes of the peacocks (13). With their currents increased by the
downpour of rain the rivers, expanding themselves, began to carry away
the trees grown on their banks. And there were seen all over them
quickly moving whirlpools (14). Stupified by the continuous showers and
having their wings distressed, the birds, as if on account of their
quiet nature, did not leave the branches of the trees (15). The sun, as
if, began to drown himself in the womb of the new clouds surcharged with
water and filled with the noise of the falling torrents (16). The earth
put on, as if, a garland of fresh grass. The huge trees, forming the
land marks, were uprooted and every where was enveloped with water. And
it was difficult, accordingly, to find out the paths (17). The
mountains, abounding in huge trees, were as it were, assailed by
thunderbolts and their summits were being carried down by the torrents
(18). The forest-land was filled with the torrents of rain flowing down
and overflowing the banks of the lakes (19). Following the muttering of
clouds, raising up their trunks and running to and fro during the rainy
season the elephants looked like clouds coming down on earth (20).

In this way when the rains set in Ronini’s son, in order to see the
clouds surcharged with water, said to Krishna in private (21). "O
Krishna, look at the dark clouds in the sky adorned with the shining
ornaments of lightning. They have, as if, stolen away the hue of your
person (22). This is the time for your sleep. The sky is like your body.
As you every year live secretly in this season so the moon is doing
(23). With the advent of the rains, the sky, covered with clouds,
growing dark-blue on account of blue clouds and shining like the
red-blue lotuses, is appearing more beautiful (24). Behold, O Krishna,
the charming mountain Govardhana, covered with dark clouds surcharged
with water, is giving a lie to its own name of _bringing up kine_²¹⁰
(25). Greatly worked up with passion on account of the falling of the
showers the black-bees are ranging happily all over the forest (26). O
you having lotus-like eyes, the highly tender green grass, vegetating
profusely by the new water, are, as if, trying to cover the earth (27).
This rainy season has not been able to increase the beauty of the
mountain, abounding in fountains, that of the forest filled with water,
and that of cultivated fields enveloped with corns (28). O Dāmodara,
driven by the quick-coursing winds, these clouds, with their dreadful
mutterings, are increasing the desire of those living in foreign
countries for returning home and are thus displaying shamelessness (29).
O Hari, O you of three foot-steps, behold, your second foot-step²¹¹ is
embellished with rain-bow of three colors without arrows and string
(30). In this month of Srāvana the sun is shorn of his beauty. His
scorching rays being cooled down by the clouds, he, although of thousand
rays, appears to have none (31). The all-spreading clouds, agitated like
the water of the ocean and accompanied by continuous showers, have, as
it were, united the earth and sky (32). The torrents of rain flowing on
earth, and the air, perfumed with the fragrance of Nipa, Arjuna and
Kadamva flowers and capable of exciting passion, blowing with sound on
high, the sky, covered with extensive and heavily showering clouds, is
appearing like a deep and vast ocean (33–34). Armed with effulgent
Nārāchas in the shape of showers, having the cloud for his coat of mail,
and the rain-bow for his bow, the sky is, as if, ready for battle (35).
O you of a beautiful countenance, covered with clouds, the mountains,
forest and the tops of the trees are looking highly beautiful (56).
Enveloped with clouds pouring down their watery contents and resembling
an army of elephants the sky is imitating the color of the ocean (37).
Blowing there with drops of water the dread ful blasts of winds, that
shake the tender plants and destroy the gravity of the oceans, are
oppressing all with cold (38). The moon disappearing from view in night
after the sun-set, and the clouds continually discharging showers, no
quarter of the sky, appears beautiful (39). Filled with passing clouds
resembling leathern bags full of air, the sky appears moving like an
animate object (40). People can make out very little difference between
day and night. What shall I speak more, O Krishna, see, Vrindavana,
relieved of heat and adorned with showers, is looking beautiful like
Chaitraratha garden" (41).

Thus describing the advantages of the rainy season, Krishna’s elder
brother, the beautiful Balarāma entered Vraja. Pleasing each other
Krishna and Sangkarshana began to range there in that vast forest in the
company of their then kinsmen the cowherds (42-43).

²⁰⁷ An insect (coccinella of various kinds).

²⁰⁸ A plant commonly Kadamba (Nancha Kadamba)

²⁰⁹ A medicinal plant.

²¹⁰ The word _Govardhana_ literally means one who nourishes kine from
 _Go_ kine and _Vardhana_ to nourish. The mountain is so
 beautifully situated that the kine grow up there without any
 hitch. But in the rains the mountain has been so covered with
 clouds that they cannot graze there at ease. It has thus given a
 lie to the true import of its name.

²¹¹ This refers to the sky, because at the sacrifice of the demon
 Bali, he placed his first foot on earth and the second in the sky.