TITLE: BALADEVA VISITS VRAJA

Vaishampayana said:—After some days had thus elapsed, Rāma, recollecting
his friendship with Gopas, alone went to Vraja with Krishna’s consent
(1). Clad in a beautifully wild attire and quickly entering into Vraja
Krishna’s elder brother, the slayer of his enemies, saw first his
charming and extensive forest that had been enjoyed by him before and
the well-scented tanks (2-3). Thereupon delighting the Gopas with his
sweet behaviour according to age and previous conduct he held various
charming conversations with the milk-women (4-5).

Thereupon the elderly milk-men said to Rāma, the foremost of sporters,
who had just returned from a foreign land in sweet words (6). "Welcome
to thee, O thou of large arms, O descendant of Yadu. We have been
pleased with seeing thee to-day (7). O hero, thou art dreadful unto
enemies and celebrated in the three worlds. We have been pleased for thy
return to Vraja (8). O hero, O descendant of Yadu, we deserve protection
from thee or (it may be) that creatures cherish attachment for their
native place (9). O thou of a pure countenance, no sooner we desired for
thy arrival than thou hadst come and seen us. Forsooth we have been
rendered worthy of the honor of gods (10). By thy good luck and by thy
own greatness the wrestlers and Kansa were slain and Ugrasena has been
installed as a king (11). We have heard of thy encounter, in the ocean,
with Timi-like Panchajana, of his destruction and thy battle with
Jarāsandha and other Kshatriyas on Gomanta (12). We have also heard of
Darada’s death, Jarāsandha’s defeat and of the descension of weapons in
that great battle (13). O hero, we have also heard, that slaying the
king Shrigāla in the charming city of Karavira thou didst place his son
on the throne and console the subjects (14). Thy entrance into the city
of Mathura is worthy of being narrated even by the gods. By it the earth
has been established and all the kings have been brought to subjection
(15). With thy arrival here, we have been, along with our friends,
pleased, delighted and favoured as before" (16).

Rāma then replied to all the Gopas stationed around him saying:—"You are
our better friends than even the Yādavas (17). We had been reared by you
and spent our boyhood in sporting here (18). We took our meals in your
houses and tended the kine. You all are our firm friends" (19). When
Halāyudha gave vent to these words in the midst of Gopas, marks of joy
were visible on the faces of their women (20).

Thereupon repairing to the forest, the highly powerful Rāma, conversant
with the knowledge of spirit, began to sport there with Gopa women (21).
Then the milk-men, conversant with the knowledge of time and place,
brought Vāruni wine to him. Rāma, of the hue of a pale cloud, drank that
wine in the forest along with his friends. Thereafter the cow-herds
brought to him diverse beautiful forest fruits, flowers, meat, sweet
juice and full blown lotuses and lilies just collected. As the mount
Mandara is adorned by the Kailāga hill so Rāma shone, with Kundalas
hanging from his cars, with diadem placed a little askance, with locks
and head and breast besmeared with sandal and decked with garlands of
wild flowers. Clad in an apparel dark-blue like a cloud his white person
appeared like the moon enshrouded by darkness. The plough-share,
attached to his hands like the hood of a serpent and the burning mace
fixed to his finger, increased his beauty the more. Thus with his eyes
rolling in intoxication, Rāma, the foremost of the strong, began to
enjoy there like the moon in an autumnal night (22-29).

Thereupon Rāma said to Yamunā:—"O great river, going to the ocean, I
wish to marry you by bathing in your water; come to me therefore in your
bodily form (30)." Out of her womanish habit and ignorance Yamunā
disregarded his words as being the out-come of drunkenness and did not
come to him (31). Thereat filled with anger and maddened with
drunkenness the powerful Rāma took up his plough share and sat with his
head looking down in order to drag her (32). The garland of flowers,
that fell down on earth, began to pour, through the leaves, clear water
(33). There upon bending down the head of his plough-share Rāma began to
drag the bank of the great river like unto a wife following her
inclination (34). At that time the currents of the river were upset and
all the fishes and the acquatic animals grew bewildered. And Yamunā too
followed the course of the plough-share (35). Dragged with force by Rāma
the powerful river Yamunā, going to the ocean, like unto a drunk woman
going astray in a high-road and over whelmed with fear, began to follow
the way pointed out by the plough-share. She had the bank for her hip,
dark-blue lotuses for her lips, the foams driven by the water for her
girdle, the grave currents for her moving limbs, the bewildered fishes
for her ornaments, the white geese for glances, the rising Kāsa flowers
for her silken raiment, the trees grown on her back for the ends of her
hairs, the current for her slippery gait, and the mark of the
plough-share for the outer corner of her eye, and the Chakravakas for
her breast. Although she goes by the lower ground she was made to go up
and brought to the forest of Vrindavana (36-41). When the river Yamunā
was brought to Vrindāvana the water-fowls, as if weeping, followed her
(42). When she crossed the forest of Vrindāvana, Yamunā, assuming the
form of a woman, said to Rāma (43):—"Be propitiated with me, O lord. I
have been terrified at these thy unfavourable actions. Behold, this my
watery form has been changed (44). O thou of large arms, O son of
Rohini, thou hast dragged me away from my own path. Therefore I have
become unchaste amongst the rivers (45). When I shall go to the ocean,
other rivers, co-wives with me, proud of their course, will smile at me,
with their foams and call me an unchaste river (46). Show me the favour,
O hero, I beg thee, O elder brother, of Krishna. Be thou delighted at
heart, O foremost of the celestials (47). I have been dragged here with
thy weapon. Do thou assuage thy ire. O thou of large arms, O thou, the
wielder of plough-share, I fall at thy feet. Do thou command me, by what
path I shall go."

Beholding Yamunā, the wife of the ocean fallen at his feet the holder of
plough-share, inebriate with wine, said (48–49):—"O beautiful Yamunā of
fair eye-brows, O auspicious damsel seeking union with the ocean, I
command thee to follow the way pointed out by my plough-share and water
this province. Be thou at peace, O noble one, and do thou proceed at thy
pleasure (50–51). As long as the world will exist my glory will
flourish."

Beholding the dragging of the ocean all the inhabitants of Vraja said to
Rāma, exclaiming "Well done! Well done!" and bowed unto him. Leaving
aside the noble Yamunā, thinking for a moment and taking leave of all
the inhabitants of Vraja, Rāma, the foremost of strikers, again repaired
to the auspicious city of Mathurā (52-54). Repairing to Mathurā Rāma saw
the slayer of Madhu, the eternal essence of the universe, stationed in
his own house (55). In his wild attire and with his breast covered with
garlands of fresh wild flowers he embraced him (56). Beholding the
holder of plough-share Rāma arrived there Govinda too rose up soon and
offered him the seat (57). After Rāma had taken his seat, Jarāsandha, in
sweet words, enquired of him about the well-being of his Vraja friends
and cows (58). Rāma then replied to his brother of sweet words,
saying:—"O Krishna, they, of whose well-being you enquire, are all
well?" (59) Thereupon Rāma and Keshava held conversations on various
ancient and profitable subjects in the very presence of Vasudeva (60).