TITLE: KRISHNA GOES TO SONITPURA AND FIGHTS WITH RUDRA’S

FOLLOWERS ON THE WAY.

Vaishampāyana said:—At that time with the sound of conch-shells and
bugles, the songs of bards and panegyrists by thousands and blessings of
men exclaiming victory Janarddana appeared like the moon, sun and Sakra.
O king, when Vinatā’s son flew up into the sky his, beauty, increased by
Hari’s energy, became immense (1-3). Desirous of killing Vāna the
lotus-eyed Keshava assumed a form having eight arms and resembling a
mountain. At that time Janārddana, the holder of Shranga-bow, assumed
innumerable heads. In his four right hands he had sword, discus, club
and arrows and by his left four hands he held the leathern protector,
the Srānga-bow, the thunder-bolt and conch-shell. Seated on Garudha’s
back, Sanghkarshana, holding a thousand forms and white weapons,
irrepressible unto all creatures like the mount Kailāsha with its
summit, shone like the rising moon. With a view to display his prowess
in battle the high-souled Pradyumna assumed a form like that of
Sanatkumār (4–8). Thereupon shaking innumerable mountains and
obstructing the course of the wind with the forcible flapping of his
wings the powerful Vinatā’s son went on. Endued with the speed of the
mind he crossed the most sacred route of the Siddhas and Chāranas. At
that time Rāma said to Krishna, incomparable in battle:—"O Krishna, what
wonder is this that we have all on a sudden been shorn of our
effulgence? We have all a golden hue. What is the cause? Have we come to
the side of the mount Sumeru?" (9–12) The Lord said:—"Methinks, O slayer
of thy enemies, Vāna’s city is near at hand. To protect him, the fire,
stationed in his city, is coming out blazing. O holder of plough-share,
we have been possessed by the effulgence of the fire of oblation: this
has changed our colour." Rāma replied:—"If by approaching the city of
Vāna we have been shorn of the lustre of our body, do what you think
proper afterwards" (13–15). The Lord said:—"O Vinatā’s son, do what you
think proper. After you have found out a means I shall do what I think
proper" (16).

Vaishampāyana continued:—Hearing those words spoken by Vāsudeva the
highly powerful Garuda, capable of assuming forms at will, assumed a
thousand mouths (17). Afterwards the highly powerful son of Vinatā
leaped up and went to the etherial Gangā. Then drinking profuse water,
he began to shower it on the fire. The intelligent son of Vinatā having
concerted this measure the fire was at once extinguished. Then seeing
that fire extinguished with the water of the etherial Gangā, Suparna,
filled with surprise, said:—"Oh! How powerful is this fire like that at
the end of a cycle. It disfigured the color of even the intelligent
Krishna." After extinguishing the fire the king of birds, Garuda, went
on making a great sound with the flapping of his powerful wings. Seeing
them the fires, the followers of Rudra, thought:—"Who are these three
dreadful men of many forms who are riding Garuda? Why have they come
here?" Those fires of the mountain thought in this way for some, but
could not settle anything. They then began to fight with the three
Yadus. A great noise arose when they engaged in fighting (18-26).

Hearing their great uproar like that of roaring lions the intelligent
Chief of the Fires Angirā sent a man to the scene of the action saying
"Soon proceed where the battle is raging." Another Asura, fleet like the
mind, was quickly despatched by Vanā saying "Go and see what is the
matter." Saying "So be it" the man at once started and saw the fires
fighting with Vāsudeva. He saw that the five principal fire-gods,
Kalmāsha, Kusuma, Dahana, Shoshana and the highly powerful Tapana well
known in the offering of Swāha and other minor fire-gods were all
fighting with their respective armies. Pithara, Pataga, Swarna, Agādha
and Vraja, these five presiding gods of Swadhā were also fighting; the
two highly effulgent fire-gods, in charge of Jyotisthoma and Vasatkāra,
were also fighting. Ascending a fiery car the great saint Angirā,
uplifting his effulgent mace, was shining in that battle-field, in the
midst of fire-gods. Then beholding Angira discharge his sharpened
arrows, Krishna, filled with anger, smiled again and again and said:—"O
ye fire-gods, wait patiently a few moments. The time of your destruction
is drawing near. Within a moment, consumed by the energy of my weapons,
you shall have to fly away on all sides." Thereupon in that great
battle, as if to take Krishna’s life Angirā ran with a burning Trishula
in his hand. Then cutting off his mace with crescent-shaped and
sharpened arrows the intelligent Krishna, effulgent like Yama, the
destroyer of all creatures, struck Angirā on the breast with a
death-like-arrow. Thereat Angirā fell down bathed in blood and with his
body mangled. Seeing it the four fire-gods, the sons of Brahmā along
with others speedily fled away to Vāna’s city (27–40).

Thereupon seeing Vāna’s city from a distance Nārada said "Behold, O
large-armed Krishna, there is the city of Shonita. For protecting Vāna
and for his well-being Kārtikeya and the highly effulgent Rudra with his
consort always live there." Hearing the words of Nārada, Krishna
smilingly said:—"Hear and understand what I say O great Muni. If Rudra
himself comes to the battle-field for protecting Vāna we will also fight
with him to our best." While Krishna and Nārada were thus conversing the
quick-coursing Garuda at once took them to the city of Vāna. Then the
lotus-eyed and cloud-like Keshava blew his moon-like conch-shell.
Blowing that conch and creating terror in Vāna of wonderful deeds the
powerful Mādhava entered into his city. Seeing them thus enter Vāna’s
soldiers got themselves ready for action sounding bugles and conch
shells. Millions of paid soldiers, holding effulgent weapons, marched
out to the battle-field. Those innumerable soldiers, of incomparable
prowess, united, looked like huge black clouds.

Afterwards the Daityas, Dānavas and the leading Pramathas, with various
burning weapons, began to fight with the eternal Krishna. When Krishna,
Sangkarshana, Pradyumna and Garuda began to fight Yakshas, Rakshasas and
Pannagas, irrepressible like burning fire, came from all sides, with
their mouths wide open, to the battle-field for drinking blood.
Beholding Vāna’s army the highly powerful Balabhadra said to Krishna,
the slayer of hostile armies:—"O large-armed Krishna, do that by which
these soldiers may be completely terror-stricken." Thus addressed by the
intelligent Balabhadra Purusottama Krishna, the foremost of the masters
of weapons, took up fiery weapons dreadful like Death. Grinding the
Asuras and birds of prey with those weapons Janārddana speedily went
where the soldiers were seen. Standing on the ground in numberless
detachments that Asura army, consisting mainly of Pramathas, holding
darts, Pattiças, Saktis, Rishthis, Pinākas and Parighas, and having many
dreadful beasts of burdens huge like mountains and clouds, appeared like
clouds scattered by the wind. And many bow-men increased the beauty of
that show. Running hither and thither with maces, darts, swords, clubs
and Parighas that innumerable Asura host increased the beauty of the
battle-field. Thereupon the beautiful Sangkarshana, seated on Garuda’s
back, said to Krishna, the slayer of Madhu:—"O large-armed Krishna, O
Purusottama, I wish to fight with this Asura host." Hearing it Krishna
said: (41-61). "I too feel the same inclination. I wish to fight in the
battle-field with these leading warriors. When I will fight with my face
towards the west Suparna will stand before me. Pradyumna will stand on
my left side and you will stand on my right. In this dreadful fight we
will all protect one another (62–63)."