TITLE: THE ENCOURAGEMENT OF DANAVAS

Vaishampayana said:—In order to welcome the Dānavas the highly powerful
great Asura Kālanemi assumed proportions like clouds in the end of
summer (1). As by acquiring most excellent ambrosia, people are relieved
of their exhaustion so the leading Danavas, on beholding Kālanemi living
in the intervening space of the three worlds, rose up as if they had
never been tired (2). Then the terrified Dānavas, headed by Maya and
Tāra, irrepressible in battle, who always wished victory in Tāraka’s
battle, shone there in the battle-field (3). Beholding Kālanemi all
those Dānavas, throwing weapons and entering into Vyuhas, were greatly
delighted (4). Of them, the principal soldiers of Maya, who were
well-skilled in fighting, cast off fear and delightedly appeared there
for battle (5). Maya, Tāra, Varaha, the powerful Hayagriva,
Viprachitti’s sons Sweta, Khera and Lamva, Bali’s son Arishtha, Kishora,
Ushtra, the immortal-like Sharbhānu and the great Asura Vakrayodhi, who
were all experts in the use of weapons, were devoted to the practice of
Tapas, and skilled in fighting, appeared before Kalanemi the foremost of
them all. Taking up huge clubs, axes, death-like maces, Kshepanyas, huge
rocks, stones, Pattishas, Vindipālas, Parighas made of best steel,
dreadful Ghātanis, Sataghnis, Yugas, Yantras, Argalas, Prāsas, nooses,
serpents, swords, thunder-bolts, blazing Tomaras, unsheathed daggers and
sharpened weapons and having their minds worked up with zeal, they,
taking Kālanemi before them, stood in front of the battle-field (6–14).
That Daitya army, adorned with many excellent shining weapons, shone
there like the cloudy sky bespangled with stars (15). Emblazoned with
the cool and hot rays of the moon and the sun, the celestial army,
reared by the king of gods, also shone there (16). There appeared that
beautiful and great army of gods consisting of dreadful Yakshas and
Rākshasas, fleet as the wind, having the stars for the steamers, the
clouds for their raiments, abounding in smiling stars and planets,
protected by Indra, Varuna and the intelligent Kuvera, the king of
riches, accompanied by the fire and air, devoted to Nārāyana, gifted
with the velocity of the ocean, and adorned with celestial weapons
(17–19). As at the revolution of cycles heaven and earth are united so
the celestial and demon armies met with each other (20). That encounter,
between the gods and demons displaying humility and pride, forgiveness
and prowess, grew exceedingly dreadful (21). As the swollen rivers
generally issue out of the oceans so the dreadful gods and Asuras came
out of both the armies (22). As the elephants come out of two
mountainous forests covered with flowers so issuing out of both the
armies the hosts of the gods and demons began delightedly to range there
(23). They confronted each other and repeatedly blew their conches and
bugles. That sound filled the heaven, earth and all the quarters (24).
The sound, of the bow-strings against the palms, the twang of the bows
and the sound of the bugles rose above the noise of the Daityas (25).
The gods and demons felled and confronted one another. Some grew
desirous of fighting duels. Some broke the arms of others with their own
(26). The gods began to throw, in battle, dreadful thunder-bolts and
excellent Ayasas and Parighas and the Dānavas began to discharge Gurvis,
clubs and Nistringshas (27). Some fell down with their limbs mutilated
by the strokes of clubs and with their bodies bent down (28).

Thereupon worked up with anger, some on cars, some on horse back and
some on quick-coursing chariots, ran towards one another in the battle
(29). Some stood in the battle-field and some fled away. The
car-warriors were obstructed by cars and the infantry were obstructed by
the foot-soldiers (30). The sound, of the wheels of those cars, grew
terrible like the muttering of clouds in the sky (31). Some broke down
the cars, some hurled chariots against chariots and some could not
proceed unitedly in the midst of that collection of cars (32). Striking
one another with their arms and sending up shouts, warriors, armed with
swords and leathern coats of mail and elated with pride, began to
proceed in battle (33). Some, mutilated and wounded by weapons in
battle, began to vomit blood like clouds discharging water in the rains
(34). Filled with those weapons and clubs thrown up and down that
encounter of the gods and demons looked exceedingly terrible there (35).
That unfair day of the encounter set in there with celestial weapons for
the lightnings, the downpour of arrows for showers and the Dānavas for
the massive clouds (36). In the mean time the great Asura Kālanemi,
being worked up with anger, began to increase his body like clouds
filled with water by the waves of the ocean (37). The Valāhakas,
consisting of flickering flames like the lightnings, discharging
thunder-bolts and huge like the mountains, were crushed down as soon as
they fell on his body (38). When he breathed in anger and sweated on
account of the frowning of his eyebrows there came out of his mouth
scintillations of fire, accompanied by lightning and air (39). His arms
began to grow up straight and awry to the sky. It appeared as if the
five-hooded black serpents were repeatedly licking their bodies (40).
That Dānava enshrouded the sky with various weapons, bows and Parighas
high as the mountains (41). Wearing a raiment shaken by the wind
Kālanemi stood in front of the battle-field like the second Sumeru
filled with flames and covered by the rays of the setting sun (42). As
the king of gods fells down the huge mountains with his thunder-bolt so
did he knock down the gods with the mountain peaks and huge trees
uprooted by the strokes of his thighs (43). Having been wounded by
Kālanemi in battle and having their heads and breasts mutilated by
diverse weapons and swords the gods could not move about (44). Some,
killed by the stroke of his foot and others grinded by him, fell down
with the leading Yakshas, Gandharvas and the great Uragas arranged in
Vyuhas (45). Thus terrorized by Kālanemi in battle the gods, bereft of
consciousness, could not set forth their exertions although they were
capable of doing it (46). Being fettered by him with arrows, the
thousand-eyed Sakra, seated on his elephant Airāvata, could not move
about in the battle-field (47). In that battle the demon Kālanemi
constrained Varuna, resembling a watering cloud and effulgent like the
waterless ocean, desist from displaying any feats and deprived him of
his noose (48). Bewailing in the battle-field the Patriarch Vaishravana,
the king of riches, was rendered, by him through illusory weapons,
inactive in the battle-field (49). Yama, who spreads death and destroys
everything, was deprived of his consciousness by Kālanemi and fled to
his own quarter (50). Having thus assailed the Patriarchs and protecting
their respective quarters Kālanemi divided, then his body, into four
parts (51). Thereupon repairing to the celestial road of stars pointed
out by Sharbhānu that demon took, by force, the grace of the moon and
his great object (52). Proceeding to the celestial region he began to
direct the sun of burning rays and then occupied for himself his object
Sayana¹⁶⁷ and his daily duties (53). Beholding fire in the mouth of the
gods Kālanemi placed it in his own and having vanquished the air by his
own strength kept it under his subjection (54). Having brought the
rivers from the ocean by his own strength and power that demon kept them
under his own control and all the seas remained there like his body
(55). Having brought under his subjection all the rivers born in heaven
and earth Kālanemi established the world well protected by the mountains
(56). That Daitya, identical with all the worlds and a terror unto all
creatures, shone there like the self-born Deity the master of all the
elemental deities (57). That Dānava, the one body of all the
Lokpākas,¹⁶⁸ indentical with the sun, moon and the planets and
resembling the fire and air, began to move about in the battle-field
(58). When that Daitya occupied the position of Paramesthi, the source
of the origin and destruction of all the worlds the demons began to
chant his glories as the gods hymn the glories of the grand-father
(Brahmā).

¹⁶⁷ The longitude of a planet reckoned from the vernal equinoctial
 point from _Sa_ with and _Ayana_, the equinoctial point.

¹⁶⁸ He defeated the Lokapālas and became himself the one regent of all
 the quarters.