TITLE: ANXIETY OF THE YADAVAS FOR ANIRUDDHA

Vaishampāyana said:—When Ariruddha was taken away as captive, his
beloved wives and their companions cried there in his absence, like so
many ewes (1). "Alas! even under the protection of the Lord Krishna, we
are weeping helplessly stricken with fear and grief (2). He, under the
shade of whose arms, Adityas, Maruts and the gods headed by Indra, are
living without any anxiety in the celestial region, has been visited by
such a great calamity in this world. Alas! who has stolen away his
heroic grandson Aniruddha 2 (3–4). Alas, that wicked-minded one, who has
excited this unbearable fire of Vasudeva’s anger, has indeed no fear in
this world (5). He is standing before the teeth of Death with his mouth
wide open. Indeed such an enemy can stand before Vasudeva in battle.
Committing such an ill turn by the Yadu king Keshava can even Sachi’s
lord escape with his life? (6-7). Alas, our husband has been stolen away
today or our lord has forsaken us and made us objects of pity. Oh I on
account of the separation of our lord, we have been brought under
control by death" (8).

Exclaiming thus those beautiful women continually wept and shed profuse
tears. Their eyes, full of tears, imitated the beauty of lotuses
immersed in water in the rainy season (9–10). Their eyes appeared to
have been bathed in blood. The cries of those women in the palace set up
a noise like that of thousands of female ospreys crying in the sky
(11-12).

Hearing that unheard, of lamentation caused by fear the Yadu chiefs all
on sudden leaped down from their respective houses. As the lions, when
assailed, come out of their caves, so the Yadavas, coming out, said,
their voice being choked with affection—"Krishna protects us all
completely. Whence is then this fear? Why is such a noise heard in
Aniruddha’s house? (13–15)." Thereupon the huge bugle of Krishna’s court
was brought and sounded; and at that sound all the Yadavas assembled
there. They asked one another "What is the matter?" And they answered
one another as they had heard (16-17). Hearing it the eyes, reddened in
anger, of the Yadavas dreadful in battle, were filled with tears; and
they sighed there idly (18). Then beholding even Krishna the foremost of
strikers sigh again and again and others sit silently Viprithu
said:—(19). "O Krishna, you are the foremost of men; why are you then
possessed by anxiety? The Yadavas, living under the protection of your
arms, are ranging freely at large. Leaving the charge of success and
defeat to you even the powerful Sakra is sleeping happily. See your
kinsmen are sunk in unfathomable ocean of grief. O large-armed hero,
save them. What is the cause of your anxiety? O Mādhava, why do you not
speak any thing? You should not indulge in such idle thoughts." Thus
addressed Vāsudeva, a clever speaker like Vrihaspati himself, sighed
again and again for some time and then said:—"O Viprathu, I was
anxiously thinking about this (20–25). Even thinking I have not been
able to settle anything. Therefore I could not give you any reply
although you asked me (26). Hear, O Yadavas, I will describe to you in
truth, why I have been filled with anxiety. On account of the captivity
of the heroic Aniruddha all the kings of the earth and my friends will
consider me incapable. Formerly our king Ahuka was taken captive by
Shālwa—but we brought him back after a dreadful fight. Rukshmini’s son
Pradyumna was stolen away by Shamvara in his infancy. But he, having
slain him in battle, has come back. But where has Aniruddha been exiled?
O ye foremost of men, I do not recollect I had before experienced such
sorrow and mental agony (27-31). I will in battle kill him with his own
people who has put on my head this foot covered with ashes." After
Krishna had said this Sātyaki observed:—"O Krishna, despatch spies all
over for finding out Aniruddha. Let them search the earth with mountains
and forests. Let open and secret emissaries be engaged in this work"
(32-34).

Vaishampāyana said:—Hearing the word of Keshava king Ahuka speedily
ordered the messengers for finding out Aniruddha. Ordering them "Search
out all the countries lying on and under the earth" the high-souled king
Ahuka gave them sufficient horses and cars. (He said):—"Do you soon go
on horse back and search the mountains Rikshavān and Raivataka covered
with trees and creepers. Enter without any hesitation into the gardens
and forests there and search every creek and corner. Riding on horses
and elephants do you soon find out Aniruddha the enhancer of the joy of
the Yadavas" (35–39).

Thereupon the Commander-in-chief Anādhristhi said to the eternal Krishna
of unwearied actions:—"O lord Krishna, from long I have been cherishing
a desire of communicating something to thee. Hear, if thou dost like, I
will communicate it at present. Asilomā, Puloma, Nisunda, Naraka,
Soubha, Shalwa, Mainda, and Dwivida have all been slain by thee (40–42).
When a highly dreadful encounter took place on account of the gods thou
didst kill Hayagriva with all his kinsmen. O Govinda, in every battle
thou didst accomplish all these works completely. No one even acted as
thy charioteer (43-44). O Krishna, while carrying away Pārijatā thou
didst perform a great and arduous feat with Anuvandha, O Mādhava; in
that battle thou didst alone, by the strength of thy own arms, vanquish
Vāsava, expert in fighting, seated on his elephant Airavata. On account
of that encounter a great hostility has been created between you both
(45–47). Methinks Maghavān himself has taken away Aniruddha; who else
but him can satisfy his enmity on thee (48)?"

After the highly powerful Anadhristhi had said this Krishna, sighing
like a serpent, said:—"Do not say so, O sir; the gods are not mean,
ungrateful, womanish and stupid. I work hard on behalf of the gods for
destroying the Dānavas. To please them I have killed the proud Asuras in
battle. The gods are my support, my mind is devoted to them, and I am
their devoted votary. Therefore knowing me, how can they injure me? You
say so out of your own meanness—they are not mean. They are truthful and
compassionate unto their votaries. I fear no danger from them. I tell
you for certain, this is not the work of Mahendra or any other gods.
Aniruddha must have been taken away by some harlot" (49-54).

Vaishampāyana said:—Hearing those words of anxious Krishna of wonderful
deeds, Akrura, capable of understanding the true meaning of words, said
in sweet words:—"O Lord, Indra’s work is identical with ours and ours is
the same as that of Sachi’s lord. We are for the gods and they should be
protected by us. We are born as men for the gods" (55–57). Thus excited
by Akrura’s words Krishna, the slayer of Madhu, said in sweet and grave
words:—"Pradyumna has not been taken away by any amongst the Devatas,
Gandharvas, Yakshasas or Rākshasas. That highly illustrious hero must
have been tempted away by some courtezan. The women of the Daityas and
Dānavas are by nature loose and tempting. Forsooth Pradyumna must have
been taken away by them. We need entertain fear from no other quarter"
(58–60).

Vaishampāyana said:—After the high-souled Krishna had said this the
Yadavas understood as the matter really was and they all highly
applauded him (61). The bards, panegyrists, poets and songsters began to
sing delightedly songs of praise in Mādhava’s house (62). In the
meantime, the messengers, who had been despatched to find out Aniruddha,
returned at the gate of the Durbar Hall and slowly and sorrowfully said
(63). "O king, all the gardens mountains, forests, caves, rivers, and
tanks, we have searched hundreds of times, but we saw Aniruddha
nowhere." O king Janamejaya, other messengers sent by Krishna returned
and said:—"We have searched everywhere, but Pradyumna has not been seen.
O Yadu chief, order hereafter what we should do about searching for
Aniruddha" (64–66). Hearing those words the Yadavas were all dejected at
heart and their eyes were filled with tears. They spoke amongst one
another, "What should we do now?" Amongst them many had their eyes
filled with tears, some bit their lips, and some frowned and all thought
how they could accomplish their object (67–68). Thus thinking they gave
vent to various words. They were stricken with great anxiety and thought
where Aniruddha could have been (69). The Yādavas, filled with anger,
looked upon one another, and with great anxiety spent the night some how
thinking where Aniruddha could have been taken away (70). While they
thus conversed the night passed away. At that time, the men, appointed
for the purpose, aroused Krishna with the sound of bugles and
conch-shells in his palace (71).

Thereupon in the clear morning when the sun rose the Rishi Nārada,
alone, smilingly entered the Darbar Hall. Seeing Krishna there along
with all the Yadavas he applauded Mādhava exclaiming his victory and
honored Ugrasena and others. Though the highly powerful Krishna,
invincible in battle, was absent-minded still he rose up and received
Nārada dedicating to him _Madhuparka_ and cows (72–74). Afterwards
seated on a white seat covered with a costly cover the celestial saint
gave vent to the following pregnant words (75). Nārada said:—"Why are
you all, like eunuchs, possessed by anxiety, silent, dispirited and
discouraged?" After the high-souled Nārada had said this Vāsudeva
replied:—"O reverend sir, O Brahman, Aniruddha has been stolen away by
somebody in the night. We are all anxious for him. Tell us, O Muni of
firm vows, if you have heard or seen anything about him. O sinless one,
by this you will do me a good work (76–79)." Thus addressed by the
high-souled Keshava he smilingly replied:—"Hear, O Madhusudana, Vāna, of
incomparable energy has a daughter by name Ushā. For her, the Apsara
Chitralekhā has taken away Kāma’s son; for this, a great encounter, like
that, between the gods and Asuras, has ensued between Vāna and
Aniruddha. Vanquished in battle, Vāna, resorting in fear to his illusory
powers, has fettered the highly powerful Aniruddha with serpentine
shafts. O Garudadhwaja, Vāna ordered for his death, but his minister
Kumbhānda has prevented him from doing so. When the prince Aniruddha
engaged in a conflict with Vāna the latter bound him with serpentine
shafts by resorting only to his illusory power. Aniruddha is not still
deprived of life; that hero is waiting patiently. Therefore O Krishna,
those, who long for victories, should not now try to keep their own
lives. Rise up soon and you will acquire success and fame (80–88)".

Vaishampāyana said:—Thus addressed the powerful and energetic Vāsudeva
made all arrangements for marching. When the large-armed Janārddana was
about to start the citizens, from all sides, showered on him sandal
powder and fried paddy (89-90).

Narada said:—O large-armed Krishna, thou shouldst now think of Garuda,
for save him no one will be able to wend that way. Hear, how very
difficult passage is that, Janarddana. Shonitpura, where Aniruddha is
now residing, is eleven thousand _yojanas_ distant from this place. The
highly powerful son of Vinata is fleet like the mind; he will point out
Vāna within a moment. O Govinda, therefore send for him; he will take
you there (91-94).

Vaishampāyana said:—Hearing the words of Nārada Govinda thought of
Garuda in his mind: and he too, with folded hands, arrived before
Krishna. Having bowed unto the high-souled son of Devaki the great son
of Vinata said in sweet words:—"O large-armed and lotus-navelled lord,
why hast thou thought of me? I wish to know what thou dost want me to
do. O lord, on whose city am I to tread and destroy it. Govinda, by thy
favour who does not know my strength? O hero, O thou of large arms, who
does not know the force of thy club and the fire of thy discus? What
stupid man, out of pride, is desirous of meeting with his own
destruction? On whose neck will Baladeva, adorned with a garland of wild
flowers, set his lion-faced plough-share? O lord, will whose body,
consumed, be mixed with earth to-day? O Mādhava, whose mind will be
agitated to-day with the blare of thy conch-shell? Who will with his
family repair to the city of Yama?" (95-101)

After the intelligent son of Vinatā had said this Vāsudeva
replied:—"Hear, O foremost of birds. Unconquerable Aniruddha has been,
for Ushā, captivated by Vāna in the city of Shonita. O king of birds,
lustful Aniruddha has been fettered with poisonous serpents. I have
invited you for releasing him. O you of great power, no body else can
wend that way. Do you therefore speedily take me where Aniruddha is. O
hero, your daughter-in-law Vaidarbhi, fond of her son, is continually
weeping. May that lady, by your favour, be united with her son. O hero,
O you of great arms, O slayer of snakes, formerly united with me you
stole away ambrosia. You are my carrier and all the Vrishnis are your
votaries. Preserve the request of love and devotion to-day. By my good
works I swear, there is none amongst the birds who can fly so quickly as
you. Killing the warriors with the flapping of your wings you, alone
formerly released your mother from slavery. Placing the gods on your
back you, with force, range many impassable countries. And by your help
they acquire victories. In heaviness you are like the mount Meru and in
lightness you are like air. There had been none before powerful like
you, there is none at present and there will be none in future. O great,
highly effulgent and truthful son of Vinatā, now help us for a moment
for Aniruddha" (102-112).

Garuda said:—"O large-armed Krishna, wonderful is thy word. O Keshava,
all my victories are owing to thy favour. O slayer of Madhu, I am
honored and blessed with thy praising me thus. O large-armed Krishna,
thine glories are chantod and thou hast still sung mine. Thou art the
lord of the Vedas, the master of the gods, the giver of all desires, of
a surely fruitful look and the giver of boons unto those who seek for
them (113-15). Thou art of four arms and four forms: thou art the
ordainer of fourfold fires, of the four Asramas and four Varnas and a
great poet. O lord, thou dost hold a bow, a discus and a conch-shell. In
thy previous bodies thou wert known as the upholder of the earth; thou
dost hold ploughshare, mace and discus, art the son of Devaki, the
grinder of Chānura, fond of cows, the slayer of Keshi, the upholder of
the mount Govardhana, the great wrestler, their origin and support and
fond of them; thou art the great Purusha; thou art fond of Brāhmanas,
ever engaged in their well being and their supporter. Thou art known as
Brahman, as Damodara, as the slayer of Pralamva, Keshi and other
Dānavas. O lord, thou art the destroyer of Asilomā, Vāli and Rāvana and
the giver of kingdom unto Bibhishana and Sugriva. Thou didst take Vāli’s
kingdom, and all the jewels and art the great jem born at the bed of the
ocean. All the rivers emanate from thee in the shape of Meru. Thou art
the lord Varuna—the holder of dagger and a great bowman and archer. Thou
art known by the name of Dāshārha, and Govinda. Thou art a great bowman
and fond of bows. Thou art sky, darkness, the churning of the ocean, the
heaven of many fruits and the great upholder of the celestial region. O
lord, thou art the great cloud, the seed of the three worlds, anger,
avarice and desire. Thou art the great bowman, Kāma, the great cycle,
revolution and dissolution. Thou art Hiranyagarbha, cognizant of forms
and endued with them, the slayer of Madhu, the Creator, the great god
and art endowed with innumerable qualities. O foremost of Yadus,
although thy glories should be chanted, still thou art willing to sing
mine. The dreadful creatures, who are seen by thee with thy eyes, are
killed by Yama’s rod and constrained to go to the hell. O Mādhava, the
creatures, on whom thou dost cast your favourable and loving looks,
enjoy happiness both in this world and in the next. O thou of large
arms, I am now at thy disposal (116-131)." Thereupon showing signs of
departure Garuda said to Keshava:—"O highly powerful hero, I wait here,
do thou sit on my back" Thereupon embracing Garuda by the neck Mādhava
said:—"O friend, accept this _arghya_ for slaying the enemy." Afterwards
having offered _arghya_ to Suparna, the large-armed Purusothama, the
holder of conch-shell, discus and club, sat on his back. Thereupon
Krishna, with delight, sat on Garuda’s back. He was adorned with most
excellent bracelets, had black hairs, was dark-hued and victorious; had
four rows of teeth and four arms. He was the master of the four Vedas
with their auxilliaries, had the mystic mark of Srivatsa on his breast,
lotus-like eyes, stirring hairs, soft skin, equal fingers, equal nails,
red fingers, red nails, and red eyes. His voice was sweet and grave and
he had large arms extending to knees and a copper-coloured countenance.
His gait was like that of a lion and he was effulgent like a thousand
suns. Having issued orders for guarding the city of Dwārakā the highly
powerful Vasudeva made himself ready for starting. He is the lord and
protector of creatures and is identical with them. The Lord Prajāpati,
with pleasure conferred on him eight-fold spiritual powers. He is
eternal and his pure glories are sung by Prajāpati, Saddhyas, gods,
bards and panegyrits and the great Rishis, masters of the Vedas and
their auxilliaries. After Krishna had sat on Garuda’s back Halāyudha and
Pradyumna, the grinder of enemies, sat behind him. At that time the
Siddhas, Charanas and the great Rishis said to Keshava in the sky:—"O
thou of large arms, do thou vanquish Vāna with all his followers. No one
will be able to stand before thee in the great battle. Lakshmi, the
goddess of prosperity, depends on thy pleasure and sure victory depends
on thy strength. Thou wilt defeat in battle thy enemy the Daitya king
with all his soldiers." Keshava marched on hearing all those words
(132-145).