TITLE: AN ACCOUNT OF PURU’S FAMILY

Janamejaya said:—O Brahman, I wish to hear truly and separately of the
families of Puru, Drahyu, Anu, Yadu, and Turvasu. Do you describe them
at length from the very beginning while describing the race of Vrishnis
(1–2). Vaishampāyana said:—O king, hear first of your own family, the
brave Puru race, from the very beginning in which you have been born
(3). O king, I shall describe to you the most excellent family of Puru
as well as those of Drahyu, Anu, Yadu and Turvasu (4). O Janamejaya,
Puru’s son was a highly powerful king; his son was Prachinvān who
conquered the eastern quarter (5). Prachinvāna’s son was Pravira whose
son was Manasyu. His son was the king Abhayada whose son was the king
Sudhanwā. His son was Vahugava whose son was Shamyāti (6-7). His son was
Rahaswati whose son was Roudrāshwa. The latter had ten sons and
daughters (8). The sons were respectively named Dashārneyu, Krikaneyu,
Kaksheyu, Sthandileshu, Saunateshu, Richeyu, Sthaleyu, the highly
illustrious Jalayeu, Dhaneyu and Vaneyu. The daughters were named Rudrā,
Shudra, Bhadrā, Shaladā, Maladā, Khalā, Chalā, Valadā, Suratha and
Gochapata. These ten daughters defeated, with their beauty, Urvashi and
other jems of women (9-11). The Rishi Prabhākara, born in the race of
Atri, was their husband. He begat on Rudrā his illustrious son, Soma
(12). When defeated by Rāhu the sun falls down on earth, and when the
whole world is accordingly enveloped with darkness he spreads his rays
all over (13). When that sage said "May good betide you" the sun,
according to his words, did not fall from the sky (14). The great
ascetic Atri was the founder of great families. At his sacrifice even
the celestials carried the riches (15). This high-souled Rishi begat on
the ten daughters of Roudrāshwa ten sons ever engaged in carrying on
hard penances (16). O king, those Rishis, who had mastered the Vedas,
were the founders of families. They passed by the name of Swastatreya.
But Atri had no money (17). Kasheyu had three sons who were all mighty
car-warriors—they were Subhānava, Chākshusa and Parmekshu (18). The
learned king Kālānala was Subhanavā’s son. His son was the pious
Srinjaya (19). The heroic king Puranjaya was Srinjaya’s son. O king,
Janamejaya was Puranjaya’s son (20). The royal saint Mahāshāla was
Janamejaya’s son. He was well-read in the Vedas and renowned on earth
(21). The pious Mahāmanā was Mahāshāla’s son. He was heroic,
liberal-minded and honoured of all gods (22). O descendant of Bharata,
Mahāmanā begat two sons, the pious Ushinara and Titikshu, endued with
great strength (23). Ushinara had five wives born in the families of
royal saints—Nrigā, Krimi, Navā, Darvi and Drisadvati (24). He begat on
those wives five sons who perpetuated his race. By carrying on hard
austerities he got all those sons in his old age, O descendant of
Bharata (25). Nrigā’s son was Nriga, Krimi’s son was Krima, Navā’s son
was Nava, Darvi’s son was Suvrata and from Drisadvati was born the king
Sivi. Sivi’s sons passed by the name of Sivis, and Nrigā’s sons by that
of Youdheyas (26–27), Nava’s capital was Navarāshtra and that of Krimi
was Krimita; whereas the metropolis of Suvrata was celebrated by the
name of Amvastha. Hear from me the names of Sivi’s sons (28). He had
four sons who were famous in the three worlds for their heroism. They
were Drishadarbha, Saviria, Kaikaya and Madrapā (29). Their prosperous
cities passed by the names of Kaikeya, Madrapa and others. Vrishadarbha
and others were all very heroic. Hear now the names of the sons of
Titikshu (30). O scion of the Bharata race, Titikshu’s son Ushadratha
was the king of the eastern division. His son was Phena whose son was
Sutapa from whom Bali was born. That (demon) king was born as man. He
had a golden quiver (31–32). The king Bali was a great ascetic in the
days of yore. He begat five sons in the world who multiplied his progeny
(33). Of them Anga was born first. Then were born Banga and Sumha. Next
to them were born Pundra and Kalinga. These were the Kshatriya sons of
Bali. Brāhmana descendants of Bali also flourished on this earth. O
descendant of Bharata, being pleased Brahmā confered on him several
boons (34–35). (They were)—the dignity of a great ascetic, a long life
extending over a _Kalpa_, invincibleness in a battle, leadership of a
religious order, the vision of three worlds, supremacy in issuing
commands, an insight into the subtleties of religion and matchlessness
in strength (36–37). The king Bali was then addressed by Brahmā saying
"You will always be a defender of the four castes in this world."
Thereat he attained to a great equanimity of mind (38). (Bali led a life
of celibacy) and accordingly the highly powerful and leading ascetic
Dirghatamā begat on his wife Sudeshnā all those _Kshetraja_ sons—the
foremost of Munis (39). Having installed his five sinless sons on the
throne Bali thought himself blessed. Thereupon practising Yoga that
great ascetic, irrepressible unto all, began to wait for time. After a
long time, O king, he returned to his own region (40–41). His sons had
five provinces, namely Anga, Banga, Sumha, Kalinga and Pundraka. Hear
now of the sons of Anga (42). The great emperor Dadhivāhana was Anga’s
son. His son was the king Diviratha (43). His son was the learned king
Dharmaratha equal to Indra in prowess. His son was Chitraratha (44).
Having celebrated a Yajna on the mount Vishnupada the high-souled
Chitraratha drank Soma juice with the king of gods (45). Chitraratha’s
son was Dasharatha who passed by the name of Lomapada whose daughter was
Shantā (46). By Rishyasringa’s favour he got a highly illustrious and
heroic son by name Chaturanga who perpetuated his race (47).
Chaturanga’s son passed by the name of Prithulāksha whose son was the
highly illustrious king Champa (48). Champa’s capital was Champā which
formerly passed by the name of Mālini. By the favour of the ascetic
Purnabhadra Haryanga was born as his son (49). Thereupon Vibhāndaka’s
son, the ascetic Rishyasringa, brought down, by virtue of incantation,
Indra’s elephant Airāvata to carry him in this world (50). Haryanga’s
son was the king Bhadraratha whose son was the king Vrihadkarmā (51).
His son was Vrihadarbha from whom was born Vrihan manā, who begat the
heroic king Jayadratha whose son was Dridaratha. O Janamejaya,
Dridaratha’s son was Viswajita (52-53). His son was Karna whose son was
Vikarna. He had a hundred sons who multiplied the race of Anga.
Vrihadarbha’s son Vrihanmanā had two wives in the two beautiful
daughters of Chaidya. They were Yashodevi and Satvi who divided the
family (54–55). O king, Jayadratha was born of Yashodevi. And from Satvi
was born the celebrated king Vijaya, who (by his equanimity of mind and
other qualities) was superior to the Brāhmanas and (by heroism and other
accomplishments was superior to) the Kshatriyas (56). Vijaya’s son was
Dhriti whose son was Dhritavrata. His son was the highly illustrious
Satyakarma (57). His son was the mighty car-warrior Suta who adopted
Karna as his son. It is therefore Karna was called the son of a
charioteer (58). The family of the highly powerful Karna has thus been
described. Karna’s son was Vrishasena whose son was Vrisha (59). I have
thus described to you the truthful and noble kings of the Anga family
who had all many sons and were mighty car-warriors (60). O king, hear
now of the family of Roudrāswa’s son Richeyu in which you have been born
(61).