TITLE: ACCOUNT OF THE SUN’S OFFSPRING

Vaishampāyana said:—O subduer of foes, Kaçyapa begat Vivaswan on Aditi,
the daughter of Daksha. He espoused the goddess Sajnā (1). That
beautiful damsel was celebrated over the three worlds by the name of
Surenu. The wife, of that high-souled, divine Mārtanda (sun) gifted with
beauty and youth (as she was) was, not satisfied with the beauty of her
husband. Amongst females on this earth Sajnā was gifted with great
ascetic powers. Having her body scorched by the rays of the sun she did
not look beautiful (2-4). Kaçyapa affectionately said (to Aditi) who was
ignorant "your embryo¹⁵ is not dead" and so he is called Mārtanda (5).
The rays of the sun are always very powerful, O my child, and the son of
Kaçyapa oppresses the three worlds therewith (6). Q foremost of
Kouravas, that best of luminous bodies, Aditya begat on Sajna three
children, one daughter and two sons who became patriarchs (7). First was
born Manu Vaivaswata and then the patriarch Srāddhadeva, then Yama and
Yamunā were born as twins (8). Thereupon beholding the pale countenance
of Vivaswān and unable to bear her own form she created Savarnā out of
her own shadow (9). Sajnā was an adept in illusion and so, O king, her
shadow at once sprang up and bowing with folded hands said to her (10).

She said:—"O thou of pure smiles, tell me what I am to do. Command me, O
fair one, I am at your service (11)".

Sajna said:—"May good betide you, I shall now go to my father’s house.
Do you now live in this my house without any anxiety (12). You should
look after these my boys and my youthful daughter. Never give out this
secret to the Divine (Sun) (13)".

The shadow said:—"I shall not give out your secret so long the sun does
not hold me by the hair or imprecate a curse on me. Go now at your
pleasure, O goddess (14)".

Vaishampāyana said:—Having said carefully "so be it". to Sarvanā, the
ascetic Sajnā went to Twasta as if in shame (15). When she met her
father he remonstrated with her repeatedly and asked her to go to her
husband again (16). Then hiding her beauty and assuming the form of a
mare, that faultless (damsel) repaired to the (province of) Uttarakuru
and began to graze there (17). Then taking the second Sajna for the
(real) one, Aditya begat a son on her after his own self (18). This lord
was like the first-born Manu and people designate him as Manu Sāvarni
(19). He became Manu Sāvarni. Her second son was known by the name of
Sani (20). O child, the immitation Sajnā did not show that affection
towards the first-born children which she did towards her own son (21).
Manu forgave her for that but Yama could not do so. Out of childishness,
anger and future glory, Vivaswata’s son Yama threatened Sajnā with a
stroke of his foot (22). O king, greatly stricken with sorrow Sāvarni’s
mother (accordingly) cursed him in anger, saying "your foot shall drop"
(23). Then worked up with anxiety on account of the imprecation and
assailed by Sajnā’s words, Yama, with folded hands, communicated
everything unto his sire (24). He said to his father:—"Do thou so
arrange as to withdraw the curse. It is the duty of a mother to show
affection equally towards all her sons (25). Disregarding us she always
loves the youngest son. So I did lift up my foot but it did not fall on
her body (26). You should forgive me for the offence that I have
committed out of childishness or ignorance; since I have insulted her,
being a son, who is worthy of my respect, forsooth shall my foot drop
off. A son may prove a bad son, but never does the mother. O foremost of
luminous bodies, O lord of the worked, I have been cursed by my mother.
Let not my foot drop by your favour (27-29)".

Vivaswat said:—"Undoubtedly, my son, there must be a mighty cause for
it, since anger has possessed you who are truthful and pious (30). I
shall not be able to make otherwise your mother’s words; taking flesh
from your foot the worms shall fall on the surface at the earth, O
highly wise one, and you will, accordingly attain to happiness. This
being done the words of your mother shall prove true (31–32). And you
will also be saved from the effect of the imprecation". Aditya then said
to Sajnā:—"Equal affection should be shown towards all children. Why are
you then again and again showing partiality towards one?" In order to
evade it she made no reply to the sun (33–34). Then having concentrated
his own self by virtue of Yoga, he found out the truth. O descendant of
Kuru, then to imprecate a curse of destruction on her the lord sun held
her by the hair. The terms of contract being thus transgressed she
communicated the truth unto Vivaswān (35-36). Hearing all Vivaswān got
enraged and approached Twasta. He too, having eulogized him (the sun)
properly who was bent upon consuming him, pacified his anger (37).

Twasta said:—"This your highly effulgent form does not look graceful.
Unable to bear your lustre Sajnā is wandering in the yellow forest (38).
To-day will you behold your wife of pure conduct, who is daily engaged
in hard austerities under the guise of a mare (39). Living on leaves,
and a life of a female anchorite, she has grown emaciated and poorly;
her hairs have grown into matted locks and she has been agitated like a
lotus crushed by the trunk of an elephant. O lord of rays, if you accept
my view, I may, for that praiseworthy damsel endued with ascetic power,
resorting to Yoga, O king of gods, convert this form of yours into a
beautiful one, O slayer of enemies (40–41)." The rays of the sun were
crooked and extended above. Gifted with such a celestial form the sun
was not of a gentle look (42). So the Patriarch (sun) attached great
importance to Twasta’s words and gave order to the celestial Architect
for beautifying his own form (43). Thereupon Twasta approached the
effulgent Mārtanda. And then placing him on a chisel, O descendant of
Bharata, he cut lose his lustre (44). When his effulgence was thus
reduced and he appeared in his new form he looked superbly beautiful and
more than it (45). The beautiful form of that lord of rays was thus
easily formed. Since then the countenance of the deity, sun, is red. The
twelve Adityas, originated from his mouth, sprang from the portions of
his effulgence dropped from the countenance of Mārtanda when the act of
chiselling was performed; they were Dhāta, Aryamā, Mitra, Varuna,
Angsha, Bhaga, Indra, Vivaswan, Pusha, the tenth Parjanya, the eleventh
Twasta and the youngest Vishnu (46-47). Thereupon beholding the Adityas
begotten of his own body he attained delight. Then Twasta worshipped him
with scents, flowers, ornaments and a brilliant crown and said to
him:—"O god, go to your own wife in Uttarakuru, who, assuming the form
of a mare, is grazing in the forest of green grass." Thereupon assuming
sportively a similar form, he, by virtue of his Yoga power, espied his
own wife in the form of a mare. O king, assuming the form of a mare she
was fearlessly wandering there and no one could distress her on account
of her energy and pious observances. Then the powerful sun, in his horse
form, knew her by his mouth (48–53). Taking him for another man the mare
did not yeild to his desire. Then from his nostril the two Aswinis, the
foremost of the physicians, were born. They were the sons of the eighth
Patriarch Mārtanda. Aditya begat the two Aswinis on Sajnā in the guise
of a mare and he then appeared before his wife in his beautiful form
(54–56).

O Janamejaya, beholding her husband she (Sajnā) was greatly delighted.
Yama, greatly sorry at heart on account of his own mis-deed, began to
please his subjects with his pious rule and he was accordingly called
_Dharmarāj_. By his holy act of pleasing his subjects he was appointed
the regent of the ancestral manes and elevated to the dignity of a
patriarch. The ascetic Sāvarni Manu was a patriarch and in the future
Savarni Manwantara he will be the Manu. The all-powerful Manu, even now,
is carrying on penances on the summit of the mount Meru (57-60). His
brother Shanischara has attained to the status of a planet. Those, who
were known as Aswinis, became the physicians of the celestial region
(61). O king, Sevata too became the physician of the horses. Twasta,
with that effulgence, created the discus of Vishnu (62). With a view to
destroy the Dānavas that discus is never baffled in a warfare. Their
illustrious twin sister Yamunā became the foremost of rivers of that
name purifying the world. Manu was known as Sāvarni Manu in the world
(63-64). His second son, Manu’s brother Sanischara attained to the
status of a planet, worshipped of all the worlds (65). He, who listens
to this story of the birth of gods or meditates on it, is freed from all
calamities and attains great renown (66).

¹⁵ The allusion is:—When Aditi was _enciente_ Budha went to her for
 alms. For her condition she was late in complying with his request
 and Budha imprecated a curse on her saying "the child will be
 dead." At this she grew pale, and Kaçyapa, knowing all this by his
 ascetic power, preserved the child.