TITLE: DIVISION OF TIME

Janamejaya said:—O you highly intelligent twice-born one, you should
enumerate the Yugas and mention the extent of Brahmā’s day (1).

Vaishampāyana said:—O subduer of enemies, hear, I shall enumerate the
days of Brahmā by the same calculation by which men make divisions of
day and night (2). Five _Nimeshas_ make one _Kāstha_, thirty _Kāshthas_
make one _Kalā_ and thirty _Kalās_ make one _Muhurtta_. And the
intelligent consider thirty _Muhurttas_ constituting one day and night
comprising the motion of the sun and moon. Such days and nights daily
take place in all the countries around the mount Meru (3–4). Fifteen
days and nights make one _Paksha_ (fortnight); two fortnights make one
month—two months make one _Ritu_ (season) (5). Three _Ritus_ make one
_Ayana_ and two _Ayanas_ make one year. Those, conversant with the
science of enumeration, divide _Ayana_ (course) into two—northern and
southern (6). Those, who have mastered (the various divisions of) time,
consider a month, consisting of two fort-nights, as the one day and
night of the ancestral manes (7). The dark-half of the month is their
day and the light half is their night. Therefore, O king, Srādhas, for
the departed manes, are performed in the dark half of the month (8).
That which is considered as a _Samvatsara_ (year) for human beings is a
day and night for the celestials. Of them the northern course is
considered by the learned as their day and the southern course as their
night (9). When a celestial year is multiplied ten-fold it is considered
as one day and night of Manu. A day and a night, when multiplied
ten-fold, constitute one _Paksha_ (fortnight) of Manu (10). A _Paksha_,
when multiplied tenfold, forms one month; and twelve months are regarded
by the wise, discriminating truth, as forming a season of Manu. Three
_Ritus_ (seasons) make one _Ayana_ and two _Ayanas_ make one
_Samvatsara_ (year) (11). Their four thousand years constitute the
extent of Krita Yuga (golden age). O king, four hundred years form the
_Sandhyā_¹³ and four hundred such form the _Sandhyāngsha_¹⁴ (12). The
extent of the Treta Yuga is three thousand years. Its _Sandhyā_ and
_Sandhyāngsha_ severally extend over three hundred years (13). It is
said that the duration of Dwāpara Yuga is two thousand years. Its
_Sandhyā_ and _Sandhyāngsha_ are said to extend each over two hundred
years (14). The wise have enumerated the duration of Kali Yuga as
extending over a thousand years. Its _Sandhyā_ and _Sandhyāngsha_ too
extend over one hundred years each (15). I have thus described the
extent of Yugas comprising twelve thousand years. Hear, from me, the
enumeration of Yugas measured by celestial Ayanas (16). Krita, Treta,
Dwāpara and Kali these are the four Yugas. O foremost of kings, with
such seventy-one Yugas one Manwantara is completed. So is said by those
who are versed in the science of enumeration. The _Ayana_, that has been
mentioned before, is two-fold, northern and southern (17–18). When one
Manu disappears his _Ayana_ is completed, and then another reigns. In
this way when many a Manu rise and disappear one _Samvatsara_ of Brahmā
is completed. His one _Samvatsara_ has been described by the
truth-observing ascetics as consisting of one million of years (19–20).
Brahmā’s one day is said to be tantamount to one Kalpa. The earth, with
her mountains, woods, and forests, sinks into water in the night which
is enumerated by the wise as extending over a thousand Yugas. O foremost
of Bharatas, at the completion of that one thousand Yugas, Brahmā’s one
day is completed and the termination of a Kalpa is said to be brought
about. I have thus described to you the preceding seventy Yugas (21–23).
Krita, Tretā and other Yugas are said to constitute one Manwantara. I
have also described to you fourteen Manus, enhancing their (own) glory
(24). O king, all these patriarchs were masters of the Vedas and
Puranas. Even the chanting of their glories is crowned with success
(25). At the termination of a Manwantara sets in the dissolution (of the
universe) after which again begins the work of creation. Even with
hundred years I cannot enumerate this period (26), O foremost of
Bharatas, during these Man wantaras, the termination of the creation and
destruction of creatures is brought about. This I have heard (27). At
that time there exist the gods with gross and subtle elements and the
seven Rishis, who carry on penances, lead a life of celibacy and are
endued with the knowledge of scriptures (28). One _Kalpa_ terminates
with the completion of a thousand Yugas. Then scorched by the rays of
the sun, all the creatures, placing the lord Brahmā before them, and
accompanied by the Adityas, approached the omnipotent lord Nārāyana, the
foremost of gods, ever engaged in Yoga, the master of Yogins, unborn,
eternal, the soul of all, who repeatedly engenders all creatures at
various Kalpas. He is the unseen and eternal God to whom belongs the
whole universe (29–31). Then there sets in night when all are converted
into one ocean. They all sleep in the belly of Nārāyana for one thousand
years of Brahmā (32). That extent of time goes by the name of night when
the Grandfather (Brahmā) enters upon the Yoga of sleep (33). After the
expiration of that night extending over a thousand Yugas awakes the
Divine Brahmā, the Grand-father of all (34). Desirous of engendering
progeny again he sets his mind on the work of creation. There comes into
existence the same ancient recollection, the same character, the same
energy for action, the same abode for the gods, but only a change in
order of things takes place. O foremost of Bharatas, then are born again
at the commencement of Yuga, the celestials saints, Yakshas, Gandharvas,
Pishāchas, serpents and Rakshas, that had (before) been consumed by the
rays of the sun (35–37). As the signs of various seasons are changed
with the change of cycles, so the various orders of creations are
metamorphosed in Brahmā’s night (38). Having come out (of the lotus
navel of Nārāyana) Prajapati engages, for sooth, in the work of
creation. O my child, O foremost of Bharatas, those gods, men and
saints, who renouncing all attachment for the body, and being pure of
mind, are united with Great Brahman, are never born in the next cycle
(39–40). Having divided his own day into a thousand Yugas (cycles) and
his night into an equal number of cycles in due order, the Divine
Brahmā, the ordainer of all, well-versed in the enumeration of time,
creates and destroys the creatures again and again (41–42). The Great
God the Lord Nārāyana, Hari exists both in his subtle and gross form. I
shall relate the history of Manu Vaivaswata born of a portion of his
energy (43). O foremost of Bharatas, hear the ancient story of the
highly effulgent Manu described incidentally along with the description
of Vrishni race (44). Here the omnipotent, Great Lord, Hari was born for
the destruction of all the demons and the behoof of all the worlds (45).

¹³ The period that elapses between the expiration of one Yuga or age
 and the commencement of another.

¹⁴ The period at the end of each Yuga.