TITLE: A DESCRIPTION OF THE ARENA

Vaishampayana said:—Upon the following day the ampitheatre was filled by
the citizens anxious to behold the great game (1). The place of assembly
was supported by octagonal painted pillars, fitted up with terraces,
doors and bolts, with windows circular or crescent; shaped and
accomodated with seats with cushions; and it shone like the ocean whilst
large clouds hang upon it, with spacious substantial pavillions fitted
up for the sight of the combat; open to the front but screened with
beautiful and fine curtains, crowned with festoons of flowers and
glistening with radiance, like autumnal clouds. The pavillions of the
different companies and corporations, vast as mountains, were decorated
with banners, bearing upon them the implements and emblems of the
several crafts. The chambers of the inhabitants of the inner apartments
shone near at hand, bright with gold and painting and net-work of gems:
they were richly decorated with precious stones, were enclosed below
with costly hangings and ornamented above with spires and banners and
looked like mountains spreading their rays in the sky; while the rays of
light reflected from the valuable jewels were blended with the waving of
white chowries and the musical tinkling of female ornaments. The
separate pavilions of the courtesans were graced by lovely women attired
in the most splendid dresses and emulated the radiance of the cars of
the gods. In the place of assembly there were excellent seats, couches
made of gold and hangings of various colours, intermixed with bunches of
flowers; and there were golden vases of water and handsome places for
refreshment, filled with fruits of various kinds and cooling juices,
sherbets fit for drinking. And there were many other stages and
platforms constructed of strong timber; and hangings by hundreds and
thousands were displayed; and upon the tops of the houses, chambers,
fitted up with delicate jealousies through which the women might behold
the sports, appeared like swans flying through the air. In front stood
the pavilion of Kansha surpassing all the rest in splendour looking like
mount Meru in radiance; its sides, its columns being covered with
furnished gold; fastened with coloured cords and every way worthy the
presence of a king (2-15).

Having ordered ’Let the elephant Kuvalyapida wait at the gate’ the king
Kansa entered the arena abounding in men hailing from various countries,
echoing with their noise, shaking and radiant like a huge ocean (16-17).
With two white chowries on his two sides, with two pieces of white
raiment on his body and a white turban on his head he shone like the
moon of white rays on the white summit of the white mountain (18). When
that intelligent king was seated at ease on his throne, the citizens,
beholding his matchless beauty, exclaimed shouts of victory (19).

Thereupon entering the arena, the powerful wrestlers, with loose
garments, took ground on three sides (20). Afterwards accompanied by the
sound of trumpets and the slapping of the arms the two sons of Vasudeva,
with delighted minds, arrived at the gate of the arena (21). As soon as
they entered there quickly those two sons of Vasudeva, of beautiful
faces, were obstructed by that mad elephant moving hither and thither
(22). Driven again and again that wicked elephant, folding up its trunk,
attempted to destroy Rama and Krishna (23). Thereupon terrorized by the
elephant, Krishna, smiling and speaking ill of the intention of the
wicked-minded Kansa, said:—"While Kansa is desirous of killing me
through this elephant forsooth he is eager to repair to the abode of
Yama" (24-25).

Thereupon when that elephant, roaring like a cloud, neared him, the
powerful Govinda, leaping up, slapped his arms (26). Roaring like a lion
and slapping his arms, he, stationed before the elephant, took its trunk
covered with water, on his breast (27). Sometimes he went between his
two tusks and again between his two legs and thus agitated him as does
wind the ocean (28). Then coming out of the top of his trunk and tusks
and of his legs Vasudeva drew his tail and put it into the ground (29).
Thereat that huge-bodied best of elephants became bewildered and could
not slay Krishna. And with his body, as if grinded, he began to roar
there (30). Then touching the earth with his two knees and assailing the
surface the earth with his tusks he began to discharge must²⁶⁵ in anger
like a cloud in the rains (31). Thus sporting with that elephant under
the pretext of a childish freak Krishna, in order to kill Kansa, desired
to destroy him soon (32). Thereupon placing his foot on his lower lip
he, with his two hands, uprooted his tusks and struck him therewith
(33). Assailed with the strokes of his own thunder-like tusks the
elephant passed urine and excreta with a great sound (34). Profuse blood
came out of the temples of that elephant whose limbs were mutilated by
Krishna and whose mind was stricken with sorrow (35). As Vinatā’s son
(Garuda) draws a serpent lying with its half on the face of a mountain
so the holder of plough-share (Baladeva) began to drag him with force by
the tail (36). Thus striking the elephant with the tusks, Krishna, with
one stroke, hurt the elephant-driver by name Ulvana (37). Then setting
up a terribly plaintive roar, that huge elephant, with his tusks broken,
fell down along with Mahāmātra like fire thrown down by thunder bolt
(38). Thereupon taking up a Torana and other weapons those two foremost
of men, Rāma and Krishna, dreadful in battle, destroyed the guards
protecting the rear of the elephant (39). Having slain them when those
two Mādhavas, adorned with wild garlands, entered the arena all the
Vrishnis, Andhakas and Bhojas took them for two Ashinis coming down, of
their own accord, from the celestial region. With their leonine roars,
shouts of joy, slapping of arms and striking of palms they pleased all
the people there (40-41). O descendant of Bharata, beholding them and
the attachment and joy of the citizens the vain Kansa was filled with
sorrow (42). Having thus slain the roaring elephant the lotus-eyed
Krishna, along with his elder brother, arrived at the ocean-like arena
(43).

²⁶⁵ It is a Persian word for _Mada_ which means a juice that exudes
 from the temples of a rutting elephant.