TITLE: KRISHNA WISHES TO GO TO VRINDAVANA AND PRODUCES WOLVES

Vaishampayana said:—In this way, Krishna and Sangkarshana passed their
childhood in Vraja and became seven years old (1). They used to put on
dark-blue and yellow raiments, paste their persons with yellow and white
paints and used to wear feathers of crows while tending kine (2). While
gone to the forest those two beautiful boys used to play on Panāvas, the
music of which is sweet to the ears, and shone there like three-hooded
serpents (3). Sometimes putting peacock feathers on their ears, crowns
of leaves on their heads and garlands of wild flowers on their breast
they shone there like two growing trees (4). Sometimes placing a crown
of lotuses on their heads, converting a rope into a sacred thread and
gourds with a string suspended, in their hands, they used to play on
flutes (5). Sometimes sporting with one another, laughing and lying down
on a bed of leaves they used to enjoy sleep (6). Thus leading the life
of a cow-herd boy and moving about delightedly hither and thither like
two young horses they beautified that forest (7).

One day the beautiful Dāmodara said to Sangkarshana: "O Sir, by sporting
everywhere in the forest we have well nigh spoilt it. We cannot play
here any more with the cow-herd boys (8). It has been divested of grass
and twigs and the milk-men have up-rooted the trees. This beautiful
forest has been destroyed by us (9). All the forests and woods, that
were thick (with trees), are now all looking blank like the sky. All
these eternally beautiful trees, that were in the cow-sheds
well-protected by walls and wooden bolts, have been destroyed by the
fire of cow-sheds (10-11). The trees and grass, that were near us, have
been all thrown away on the ground at a great distance (12). Water,
trees, groves and other resorts have now become scarce in this forest.
Even by searching we cannot get at a place for rest. It has become very
dreary and trees are not to be seen (13). The trees have been destroyed
by the people of this extensive village. The birds have fled away from
the useless trees (14). This forest, divested of birds, has become
disgusting like rice without curry and other vegetable dishes. Even the
delightful winds do not blow here (15). Woods and vegetables, grown in
the forest, are now being sold. The grass is all destroyed and this
village has taken the appearance of a city (16). The ornament of the
mountain is the village of herdsmen, the forest is its ornament and the
cows are the ornaments of the forest. And they are our most excellent
refuge (17). Let the wealthy inhabitants of Vraja repair to another
forest filled with new trees and grass; when the extensive villages, of
milkmen, are shut out by doors and when the fields are covered with
houses they do not look beautiful like the Chakrachari²⁰⁶ birds (19).
When excrement and urine fall on grass its juice becomes poisonous. The
cows do not like to graze on it and it is unwholesome for milk (20). We
wish to range, with our kine, in the charming new woods which are almost
like dry ground. Let this station of milk-men be also transferred there
(21). I have heard that there is a charming forest on the bank of Yamunā
abounding in profuse grass, endued with all the virtues and freed of
thorns and insects. It is named Vrindāvana. It is filled with fruits,
water and Kadamba trees (22-23). Cool winds always blow there in the
forest as if it is an asylum of all the seasons. All the woods there are
so very charming that the milk-men will be able to range there happily
(24). Near it is the huge mountain Govardhana with a high summit like
the mount Mandāra near the celestial garden Nandana (25). In the centre
of that mountain there is a huge fig-tree, by name Bhāndira, consisting
of high branches and extending over a _yojana_. It shone there like a
dark-blue cloud in the sky (26). Like unto the river Nalini flowing in
the garden of Nandana, Kālindi, the foremost of streams, passes through
its middle as if forming a line for separating hairs on each side of the
head (27). With great joy we will always behold there the mount
Govardhana, the tree Bhāndira and the charming river Kālindi (28). O
Sir, mayst thou fare well. Leaving this forest which has no attractions
do thou lay out there the station of milk-men. Let us now, creating some
calamity, terrify the milk-men" (29).

While thus talking the intelligent Vasudeva engaged himself in a
thought. From the hairs of his body there arose hundreds of wolves
living on fat, blood and flesh. As soon as they came out they ran in all
directions as if it to devasstate the village Vraja. Beholding them fall
upon calves, kine and their women the milk-men were stricken with great
fear. Forming themselves into groups of five, ten, thirty, twenty and a
hundred those dark-faced wolves, bearing the mystic mark of Srivatsa,
that had come out of the body of Krishna, began to range there and
increase the fear of milkmen. Thus striking terror to the entire land of
milkmen, those wolves, eating up calves, stealing away the boys in the
night, well nigh devastated it. None, then, dared enter into woods, tend
his kine, fetch any thing from the forest and go to the river. In fact,
stricken with fear and motionless, they, with an anxious mind, began to
live there. Those wolves, powerful like tigers, created such a fear in
the inhabitants of Vraja, that they were afraid of even moving their
limbs or shaking their body. And they used all to live together (30–38).

²⁰⁶ A kind of wild fowls. As when they are shut up in a cage—they do
 not feel themselves at ease, so when the villages are well
 protected by gates like cities they lose their native beauty.