TITLE: KRISHNA’S ARRIVAL

Vaishampayana said:—Thereupon yoking (the horses to the) car and
ascending thereon the liberal giver Akrura set out with Krishna and
Sangkarshana and reached the charming city of Mathurā protected by
Kansa. And before evening when the sun was in its crimson colour he
entered that beautiful city (1-2).

Taking the heroic Krishna and Sangkarshana of beautiful colour first to
his own house the intelligent giver of liberal presents, effulgent like
the sun, said to them:—

"O sire, for the present you are to relinquish the desire of going to
Vasudeva’s house (3-4). For you, your old father is being day and night
chiden by Kansa. So you should not wait here long (5). You should do
such a good and pleasant work on his behalf that your father may attain
to happiness (6)."

Hearing this Krishna said:—"If you like O pious (Akrura) we, while
visiting Mathura and her highways, will enter unperceived into Kansa’s
house (7)."

Vaishampāyana said:—Bowing unto Krishna in his mind Akrura too, with a
delighted mind, went to Kansa (8). Thus instructed those two heroes went
on visiting all the high-ways like two elephants let free from their
posts and desirous of fighting (9). Seeing a washer-man on the way they
asked of him beautiful clothes (10). The washer man replied to them,
saying "Who are you? Out of ignorance you have been fearlessly wanting
the robes of the king. It seems you are rangers of the forest (11). I
dye, as he desires, all the clothes of the king Kansa which he gets from
various countries (12). Methinks, born in a forest you have grown up
with the deer. Otherwise why do long for and pray for the various dyed
clothes (13). You are stupid and of inferior intellect, or else why do
you desire for king’s clothes. Perhaps giving up all hopes of your life
you have come here (14)."

Destiny was against that stupid washer-man of feeble understanding and
therefore he discharged such poisonous words. Krishna grew offended with
him and struck him on the head with his fist strong as the thunder-bolt.
With his head sundered he fell down lifeless on earth (15-16). Thereupon
the wives of that washer-man, bewailing for their dead husband
indignantly and with dishevelled hairs, soon approached Kansa’s house
(17).

Like two elephants attracted by smell those two sweet speeched brothers
went to a shop for garlands (18). There lived a wealthy, sweet-speeched
and good-looking garland dealer by name Gunaka. He had a large stock of
garlands (19). Desirous of having garlands Krishna, with sweet words and
without any hesitation, said to the shop-keeper "Give me some garlands
(20)." Hearing this the garland-dealer was pleased and conferred upon
those two beautiful brothers a number of garlands and said "These are
all yours (21)." Being pleased Krishna conferred upon Gunaka a boon
saying "O gentle one, the goddess of prosperity, who is my dependant,
shall always live by you with profuse riches (22)." With his head
bending low and touching the feet of Krishna that garland-dealer
patiently accepted the boon (23). Then thinking "They are Yakshas," the
garland-dealer, stricken with great fear, did not give any reply (24).

Thereupon again going to the high-way the two sons of Vasudeva espied
Kuvjā with pastes in her hands (25). Seeing her Krishna said:—"O
lotus-eyed Kuvjā, tell me quickly for whom you are carrying these
unguents" (26). Hearing this Kuvjā, going obliquely like a lightning,
with delightful eyes and smiles said to the lotus-eyed Krishna in words
grave as the clouds (27). "May you fare-well. I was going to the king’s
bath-room. I am waiting here because you are a darling of my heart; come
and accept this unguent. O you of lotus-eyes, of you of a beautiful
face, seeing you I am filled with surprise (28–29). O gentle one, whence
have you come that you do not know me. I am a favourite of the king and
engaged in the work of smearing his body" (30).

Krishna then replied to Kuvjā who stood there smiling: "Give us unguents
befitting our body (31). O you of a beautiful face, we are wrestlers who
travel over the countries. We have come here at present to see this
happy and prosperous kingdom and to witness this bow-sacrifice (32)".
She said to Krishna "No sooner I have seen you than you have become my
favourite. Without any hesitation accept this unguent becoming a king
(33)." Thereupon besmearing their beautiful persons with unguents those
two brothers shone like two bulls covered all over their body with the
mud of Yamuna (34). Thereupon Krishna, conversant with the art of
arranging for sports, softly touched the haunch of Kuvjā with his
fingers (35). Knowing her haunch (thus) broken, the beautiful and sweet
smiling Kuvjā, like unto a straight creeper, said with love to Krishna
displaying her gestures and laughing aloud "Where wilt thou go? Wait
here, requested by me. Take me (36–37)." The eternal Krishna and Rāma
had a knowledge of Kuvjā’s accomplishments and therefore looking at each
other they began to laugh striking their palms (38). Thereupon smiling a
little Krishna sent away Kuvjā who was stricken with desire. Thus
liberated from Kuvjā’s (grasp) they set out for the court (39).

Thereupon those two brothers, dressed like milk-men and brought up in
Vraja, entered the palace without betraying the designs they had at
heart by the gestures of their faces (40). Like two proud lions, born in
the Himalaya forests, those two boys, unnoticed, reached the house of
bows (41). Desirous of seeing that bow embellished with celebrity those
two heroes said to the keeper of the house of weapons (42). "O keeper of
Kansa’s bows, hear our words. O gentle one, where is that bow for which
this sacrifice is being celebrated (43)? If you like, show us that
celebrated bow." He then showed them the bow resembling a pillar, to
which even the gods headed by Vāsava cannot set a string and which
cannot be broken down. The powerful Krishna took it up with his hand
(44–45). Taking up with his hand with a delighted mind that bow
worshipped of the Daityas the powerful lotus-eyed Krishna stretched and
bent it continually. Bent with force by Krishna that celebrated bow,
resembling a serpent, broke in twain. Having thus broken that best of
bows, the quick-coursing youth Vāsudeva issued out of that room along
with Sangkarshana (46-48). At that time all the quarters were filled
with the sound of the snapping of the bow resembling that of the wind
and the entire inner appartment shook at it (49). Thereupon terrified
the guard, coming out of the room of weapons, speedily approached the
king and breathing like a crow said—"Hear, I shall relate what wonderful
incident, like unto the dissolution of the world, has taken place in the
house of bows. Two heroic men, capable of assuming forms at will and
resembling the sons of gods, clad in blue and and yellow raiments and
besmeared with such unguents, at once entered into the inner appartment
unnoticed by men. The effulgence of their body is like new fire and
their locks are adorned with spreading tufts of hair (50–53). They were
adorned with beautiful raiments and garlands. Those two gentle heroes,
as if at once came, down from the sky and stationed themselves in the
bow-room. I have seen this myself distinctly (54). Of them the
lotus-eyed and dark hued hero, who wore yellow apparel and garlands,
took up that best of bows which even the gods cannot (55), O king,
although a boy, he easily and speedily with force stringed and bent that
huge iron bow (56). When that large armed hero drew that bow without
arrows with a great sound it broke into two pieces in its middle (57).
With the sound of the snapping of that bow the sun was shorn of its
effulgence, the earth was agitated and the sky was as if displaced (58).
O you, a terror of your enemies, beholding this great super-human deed I
am filled with surprise and in fear come have to communicate to you this
news. Of those two heroes of unmitigated prowess, one is like the mount
Kailāsa and the other is like a mountain of collyrium in hue. I do not
know who they are. As an elephant breaks down a pillar so that hero, of
great prowess, shattered that precious bow in twain and went away
speedily like air with his companion. I do not know who he is, O king"
(59–61). Kansa knew everything from before, so hearing of the breaking
of the bow he did not say any thing. Dismissing the guard he entered
into his most excellent room (62).