TITLE: AN ACCOUNT OF SANTANU’S FAMILY

Vaishampayana said:—Thereupon hearing the words of the earth and
thinking minutely on her object the gods said to the grand-father (1).
"O Lord, thou hast created the bodies of all creatures. Thou art the
lord of all the worlds. Do thou therefore relieve the earth of her load.
O lord, if thou dost wish to accomplish the object of the earth in this
her calamity do thou, without delay, ascertain the duties of Mahendra,
Yama, Varuna, the king of riches, Nārāyana, the moon, the sun, the air,
the Adityās, the Vasus, the Rudras, the Patriarchs of the world, the
celestial physicians, the Aswinis, of the Sāddhyas, of Vrihaspati,
preceptor Sukra, of Kāla, of Kali, of Maheswara, of Kārtikeya, of
Yakshas, Rākshasas, Gandharvas, Chāranas, great serpents, of birds, huge
mountains and oceans consisting of great waves of rivers headed by Gangā
(2–8). O grand-father, how shall we send down our portions? Let us
create bodies, not born of any woman, in the family of those kings who
range in the sky, in that of the kings who tread the earth and in that
of courtier Brāhmanas and other princes (9-10)". Hearing this great
resolution of the gods assembled together for one common cause the
grand-father of all, eulogised by the celestials, said to them (11). "O
ye leading celestials, I like very much your resolution. Do you create
portions of your body on earth with your energy (12). Ye are all leading
celestials, do ye, with your energy, descend on earth. And acquiring the
prosperity of the three worlds do you relieve the earth of her burden
(13). Listen to what I did in the days of yore for removing the load of
her burden when I was informed of it (14).

"In the days of yore I was seated on the western bank of the eastern
ocean along with my grand-son the great Kashyapa (15). I was describing
various themes relating to the Vedas described before, as well as many
other episodes of the Purānas (16). While I was thus discoursing, you
all, accompanied by Maruts and the ocean and Gangā in their forms, came
to me (17). With rushing waves, clad in a variegated raiment of acquatic
animals, with a body shining with shells and pearls, adorned with corals
and jewels, accompanied by the moon and roaring like a cloud surcharged
with water, the ocean, as if vanquishing me, came to its bank. And
throwing up its salt waters he greatly distressed that place (18–20).
When the ocean was about to assail that place with his water I said to
him in angry words ’be quiet’ (21). No sooner I said ’be quiet’ than he
assumed a form. And with all his waves stilled he shone there in right
regal grace (22). Desirous of encompassing your well-being and relieving
the earth of her burden I imprecated a curse on the ocean and Gangā,
saying ’O ocean, since you have come in a regal form, go, you will be a
king. Performing many feats with your own power on earth, you will be
born in the race of the great Bharata and be a protector of men.
Although impatient you assumed a form as soon as I asked you to be
quiet. Therefore gifted with a beautiful person you will be celebrated
on earth by the name of Shāntanu. And this foremost of rivers, Gangā, of
unblemished limbs and expansive eyes, will go to you in a beautiful form
(23-27)’. When I said this, the ocean, being depressed at heart, looked
at me. He said ’O Lord, O god of gods, why dost thou imprecate a curse
on me? I always obey thy commands. I have been made by thee and am
always under thy protection. I am therefore thy son. Why hast thou then
cursed me in unbecoming words? (28–29). O lord, by thy favour, my waves
increased with the tides and so I was agitated. O Brāhman, how am I to
blame for this? (30). If during that time thou hast been touched by
water thrown up by the wind, what reason is there for thy imprecating a
curse on me (31)? I was agitated by three-fold instruments namely the
blowing wind, the increasing cloud and _Parva_ accompanied by the moon
(32). O Brahman, if I have committed any offence for these three
instruments set to work by thee it behoves thee to forgive me and let
there be an end of this curse (33). If dost thou find any evidence, O
lord of gods, do thou show me mercy who have been depressed by a curse
for no offence of mine (34). O lord, by thy command, this Gangā will
descend on earth. I am guilty but thou shouldst show mercy on this
innocent one (35).’

"Thereupon I said in sweet accents to the great ocean who had been
terrified and moved by the curse of the gods who were innocent of the
cause thereof. ’O you of great mind, O lord of rivers, be thou at ease,
do not fear, I have been propitiated with thee, Listen now to the future
object of this imprecation (36–37). O lord, renouncing this thy ocean
body, go to the race of Bharata. Then, O great ocean, O great king, you
will be enveloped with regal grace. There, O lord of waters, you will
govern the four Varnas and be pleased (38–39). And assuming, a beautiful
form of a woman, this Gangā, the foremost of rivers, will serve you
(40). Sporting with Jānhavi, by my command you will not experience human
miseries (41). O ocean, be you soon united with Gangā in wed-lock and
carry out my command (42). Exiled from the celestial region the Vasus
have entered the _Rasātala_. I appoint you for procreating them (43).
Let Jānhavi, for having offspring, conceive those eight Vasus who are
effulgent like fire and increase the joy of the celestials (44). Having
procreated the Vasus, multiplied the Kuru race and cast off your human
body, you will, in no time, assume your ocean body’ (45).

"O foremost of gods, thus in the days yore beholding the future burden
of the earth, I sowed the seeds of Shāntanu’s race for your well-being
in which have been born the Vasus who live in the celestial region
(46–47). Even now in the celestial region exists Gangā’s son Bhishma as
the eighth Vasu. The seven other Vasus have repaired to their respective
regions and only Vishnu is now living (48). The king Shāntanu begat on
his second wife the highly effulgent and powerful king Vichitravirya
(49). The two sons of Vichitravirya were the two famous kings of the
world Dhritarāstra and Pāndu, the two foremost of men (50). Of them
Pāndu had two beautiful and youthful wives. The first was named Kunti
and the second was named Mādri. And both of them were like the wives of
the celestials (51). Dhritarāshtra had one wife, by name Gāndhāri, who,
by stead-fastly serving her husband, became celebrated in the world
(52). Herein that house will be divided into two hostile parties and a
terrible dissension will take place amongst the sons of those two kings
(53). On account of the internal dissensions of these kings all the
royal families will be destroyed. A terrible fear, like the hour of
universal dissolution will then prevail (54). When all the kings, with
their armies, will be slain by one another the cities and kingdoms will
be shorn of their inhabitants and Earth will enjoy relief (55). I have
read in the Puranas that in the end of the Dwāpara Yuga, all the kings,
with their armies, will be destroyed by weapons. Then Ashwathama, a
portion incarnate of Sankara, with the fire of weapon, will consume the
remnant of humanity in battle lying unconscious, at night, in sleep
(56–57). When that one of cruel deeds, the like of death himself, will
desist, this story relating to the the Dwāpara Yuga, will come to a
close (58). When Ashwathāmā, a portion of Siva, will disappear, the
dreadful Kali Yuga of Maheswara will set in (59). In this Yuga people
will perpetrate many iniquities and there will flourish only a portion
of virtue. Truth will disappear and falsehood will be stored up (60). In
this Yuga, people will worship only Maheswara and Skanda; old and
long-lived men will not exist on the earth (61). I have thus described
the most excellent annihilation of the kings of this world. Therefore, O
ye celestials, descend on earth, without delay in your respective
portions (62). Let Kunti and Madri conceive portions of Dharma and let
Gandhāri conceive Kali the instrument of all dissensions (63). These
kings, urged on by destiny, will form two parties and being desirous of
securing the earth, will seek a war (64). Let Earth, who upholds all the
worlds, enter into her own native source. This sacred and well-known
means of the kings is thus created (65)." Hearing the words of the
Grand-father Earth with Kāla went away happily for encompassing the
destruction of the kings (66).

Thereupon Brahmā despatched the gods for slaying their enemies. The
ancient Rishi Nara the (Serpent) Sesha, that upholds the earth,
Sanatkumār, the Sadhyas, Agni, and other gods, Varuna, the Vasus, the
sun, the moon, the Gandharvas, the Apsaras, the Rudras, the Viswas, the
two Aswinis all descended on earth in their respective portions (67–69).
As described by me before the incarnations of the portions of gods,
those foremost of Purushas were born, through women or otherwise, on
earth as the destroyers of the Daityas and Dānavas. Some of them
multiplied their families like fig-trees. And some of them were
hard-bodied like thunder-bolts (70–71). Some of them were endued with
the strength of a million of elephants. Some of them were powerful like
mighty currents and some were capable of handling clubs, Parighas and
other weapons (72). All of them were capable of striking with the
summits of the mountains. Hundreds and thousands of men, having arms
like Parighas, were born in the race of Vrishnis. And the gods were born
in the races of Kuru and Panchala as kings. There were born in the
prosperous family of Yadus and those of Brāhmanas many sacrificers of
pious deeds, well read in the scriptures, mighty bow-men, observant of
Vedic rituals and endued with prosperity and accomplishments (73–75).
Whenever angry they could shake the mountains, the rivers, the surface
of the earth, rise up in the sky and agitate the mighty deep (76).

Having thus commanded the gods the Grand-father Brahmā, the master of
present, past, and future, consigned all the worlds to Nārāyana and
attained peace (77). Listen again to what the Omnipotent Nārāyana,
Vishnu, of sacred fame, the lord of wealth and life, did for the behoof
of creatures after incarnating himself on earth and taking birth in the
family of the intelligent Vasudeva, the descendant of Yayāti (78–79).