TITLE: LAMENTATIONS OF KANSA’S WIVES

Vaishampayana said:—Beholding their husband slain and fallen Kansa’s
wives encircled him like planets of decreasing lustre (1). Beholding
their lion-like royal husband slain and lying down on earth his wives
began to bewail (2). "O thou of large arms, a hero, ever observant of
heroic vows like thyself, being slain, we all, being the wives of a
hero, have become friendless and all our hopes have been frustrated (3).
O foremost of kings, seeing this thy ordained death we are plaintively
bewailing along with our relatives (4). O highly powerful lord, thyself
being dead and cast off by thee we have our roots cut off (5). Alas!
When stricken with sexual desire we will tremble in anger like creepers.
Who will take us to the bed-room (6)? O gentle one, is it meet that the
sun should scorch thy charming face full of breaths like a lotus without
water (7)? O thou who wert ever fond of Kundalas! Divested of Kundalas,
thy ears, attached to thy neck, are not shining well (8). O hero, where
is that crown crested with jewels and effulgent like the sun that used
to increase greatly the beauty of thy head (9)? Thyself repairing to the
other world, how will these thy thousand wives, ever gracing thy inner
apartment, pass their days poorly (10)? Chaste wives are never
disappointed from their enjoying in the company of their husband nor are
they forsaken by him; why dost thou then leave us behind (11)? Alas!
Time is highly powerful; for although a death to thy enemies thou art
being speedily taken away by Time who carries on his work in order (12).
O lord, we are unworthy of sorrow and have been brought up by thee in
happiness. Being deprived of our lord and miserly how shall we spend our
days (13). A husband is the only refuge unto those women who care for
their character. But the powerful Death has killed such a husband of
ours (14). Possessed by widowhood in thy absence and sunk in the deep
ocean of lamentations, where shall we repair, with hearts stricken with
sorrow (15)? Alas! fickle is the movement of men. Sporting on thy lap we
were spending our days with thee. Now in a moment we have been separated
from thee (16). O thou the conferrer of honors, thyself meeting with
this calamity, we have been visited by disasters. It seems, we all
perpetrated a similar iniquity for we have all in the like manner, met
with widowhood (17). Alas! We were all fond of thee and thou didst take
care of us with heavenly enjoyments. Casting us off where dost thou go
now (18)? O lord of the world, O giver of honors, O thou resembling a
celestial, thou art our master who have been separated from their lord.
O lord, we are bewailing like hind; it behoves thee to give us a reply
(19). O lord sovereign, thy departure, making thy kinsmen sorrowful and
thy wives bewail, appears (to us) as terribly hard (20). Forsooth it
appears O lord, that the damsels of the other world are more beautiful,
because, O hero, thou hast departed leaving behind thy own people (21).
What is the reason O hero, that thou dost pay no heed to the
lamentations of thy wives (22). Alas, the march of men to the other
world is ruthless, because without caring for them they even forsake
their own wives (23). It is better for women not to have husbands than
beloved, heroic husbands, because they love the women of the celestial
region and they too are fond of heroes (24). Alas! carrying away
imperceptibly such a heroic husband Death has pierced our very vitals
(25). O lord of the world, having slain the army of Jarāsandha and
vanquished the other enemies in battle why hast thou met with death at
the hands of an ordinary man (26)? Alas! Fighting with Indra in a combat
of arrows thou wert not defeated by the immortals. How hast thou been
then slain by a mortal (27)? Having agitated, with a shower of arrows,
the ocean that is incapable of being moved thou didst conquer Varuna the
holder of the noose, and take away all his riches (28). When Vāsava did
not pour profuse showers, thou didst, for the citizens, bore through the
clouds with thy arrows and bring down rain by force (29). By thy prowess
all kings were humiliated and used to send thee the precious jewels and
clothes (30). Alas, thy manliness was manifest unto thy enemies and thou
wert like a god. How has then such a life-ending calamity befallen thee
(31)? Thyself being slain O lord, we are passing by the name of widows.
Although not mad we have become so and have been assailed by death (32).
O lord, if thou wert determined upon departing why hast thou then
forgotten us? Would it have tired thee if thou hadst say it in mere
words (33)? O lord, O king of Mathurā, we bow unto thy feet in fear. Be
thou propitiated and return from the distant land (34). O hero, how dost
thou lie down on grass and dust? Prostrating thyself on earth does not
thy body feel any inconvenience (35)? Alas, who has inflicted on us this
stroke of sleep? Who has ruthlessly struck the body of these women (36)?
The woman, who has to survive, should weep and repent. Why should we
weep when we are to follow our husband (37)?"

In the meantime trembling poorly and crying aloud "Where is my son?
Where is my child?" Kansa’s mother arrived there (38). Beholding her son
like unto the moon shorn of its lustre her heart as if broke assunder
and she repeatedly lost her consciousness (39). Beholding her son and
exclaiming "Alas! I am undone!" she began to bewail along with her
daughters-in-law (40). Placing on her lap the head of her son, that one,
fond of sons, began to bewail plaintively saying "O my son, O thou the
enhancer of the delight of thy kinsmen, O thou ever devoted to the vow
of a hero, why hast thou departed so soon? O my son observant of vows,
why art thou asleep before all men? The kings should never lie down on
earth in this way (41–43). When in the days of yore all the Rākshasas
assembled Rāvana, the foremost of the strong in all the worlds, uttered
the following verse, spoken well of by the sages (44). ’Although I am of
great strength and a destroyer of the immortals, a terrible and
irresistable calamity will proceed to me from my kinsmen (45). And such
a life-destroying great calamity will also proceed to my intelligent son
from my relatives (46)’". Thereupon weeping like unto a cow, separated
from her calf, she said to her husband the old king Ugrasena (47). "Come
and see, O pious king, this thy royal son is lying on the bed of a hero
like a mountain clapped by a thunderbolt (48). O king, you are to
perform the obsequial rites of this thy son who has repaired to the
abode of Death and attained to the state of a ghost (49). Kingdoms are
worthy of being enjoyed by heroes and we have been defeated. Go and ask
Krishna about Kansha’s funeral rites (50). Enmity terminates with
death—it ceases with the death of the enemy. His obsequial rites should
therefore be performed. What offence has the dead body committed (51)?"
Having said this to the Bhoja king with a heart laden with sorrow and
casting her looks again on the face of her son Kansa’s mother began to
bewail anew, saying (52): "O king, what will thy wives do hereafter,
who, even having obtained a husband like thee, have their desires
frustrated? (53) How shall I now see thy aged father dried up under the
subjection of Krishna like water in the pool (54)? O my son, I am thy
mother, why dost thou not speak to me? Leaving behind thy beloved people
thou hast departed to a distant land (55). O hero, the inevitable Death
has, against the knowledge of this unfortunate woman, taken away a son
like thee well-read in moral laws (56). O the master of thy clan, thy
servants, who were pleased with thy qualities on receiving honors and
various presents from thee, are now weeping (57). O foremost of kings, O
thou of large arms and great strength, rise up and save the people of
thy house and other poor men (58)."

While the wives of Kansa, stricken with great misery, were thus
bewailing the sun, smitten with evening rays, set in (59).