TITLE: VASUDEVA’S FAMILY

Vaishampayana said:—Of the fourteen beautiful wives of Vasudeva, Rohini,
of Puru’s race, was the first Madirā, the second, Vaishākhi the third,
Bhadrā the fourth, Sunāmā the fifth, Sahadevā the sixth, Devaki the
seventh, Shāntidevā the eighth, Shridevā the ninth, Devarakshita the
tenth, Vrikadevi the eleventh, Upadevi the twelfth, Sutanu the
thirteenth, and Badarvā the fourteenth. The last two were his female
attendants (1–3). Rohini, of Puru’s race, was the daughter of Vālhika. O
king, she was the first and most beloved wife of Anākadundhuvi (4).
Vasudeva begat on Rohini his eldest son Rāina, Shārana, Shatha,
Durdhama, Damana, Swabhra, Pindāraka, Ushinara, and a daughter by name
Chitrā. O descendant of Kuru, it was Chitrā who passed by the name of
Subhadrā (5–6). Vasudeva begat on Devaki the highly illustrious
Shouri.⁶² Rāma begat on Revati his beloved son Nishatha. Arjuna begat on
Subhadrā the mighty car-warrior Abhimanyu. Akrura begat Satyaketu on the
daughter of the king of Kāshi (7-8). Hear, now, of the heroic sons whom
Vasudeva begat on his seven noble wives (9). Bhoja and Viyaya were the
sons of Shāntideva. Vrika deva and Gada were the sons of Sunāmā (10).
Devarakshitā obtained Upāsangavara as his son. Vrikadevi, the daughter
of the Trigarta king, gave birth to the high-souled Agāvaha. His priest
Shaishirāyana once grew desirous of testing the manhood (of his
brother-in-law Gārgya, the priest of the Yādavas) (11–12). On account of
a false charge being laid home to him⁶³ Gārgya was filled with anger and
remained like black iron for twelve years (13). He then began to live
with a cow-herd’s daughter. A nymph, by name Gopāli, came to him in this
guise (14). By the command of Shulapāni⁶⁴ Gārgya, made his human wife
conceive, the embryo whereof was irrepresible and never to die (15). She
gave birth to a highly powerful king by name Kālayavana. Horses, having
their heads like those of bulls, used to carry him in battle (16). O
king that child grew up in the city of the king of Yavanas⁶⁵ who had no
issue. And accordingly he was named Kālayavana (17). Growing desirous of
entering into a battle that king questioned the twice born ones. Thereat
the omniscient Nārada asked him to fight with the members of Vrishni and
Andhaka families (18). Thereupon starting for Mathurā with one
Akshouhini⁶⁶ of soldiers Kālayavana sent his messenger to the house of
Vrishnis and Andhakas (19). Thereupon being united the Vrishnis and
Andhakas, making the highly intelligent Krishna their president, held a
conference in fear of Kālayavana (20). Then honoring Pinaki⁶⁷ thev
resolved upon flying away from the charming city of Mathurā and thought
of settling down in Kushasthali Dwarkā.⁶⁸ He, who being pure and
self-controlled, listens to the story of Krishna’s birth, becomes
learned, happy and freed from debts (21–22).

⁶² A name of Krishna.

⁶³ The sentences are very elliptical. The purport is, Saishirayana
 put his brother-in-law Gargya to test and found him
 self-controlled. He however put a wrong construction on this fact
 and thought that he had no manhood in him. This enraged Gargya
 very much whose anger was pacified after twelve years.

⁶⁴ A name of Siva. The word literally means one who has a mace in his
 hand.

⁶⁵ A class of non-Aryans. The nymph Gopali, after giving birth to
 that son, left the king.

⁶⁶ A complete army consisting of 1,09,350 foot, 65,610 horses, 21,870
 chariots, and 21,870 elephants.

⁶⁷ A name of Siva. Literally it means the _holder of Pinaka_, a
 trident or three-pronged spear.

⁶⁸ Dwarka situated in the country of Kanyakuhia or Kanoui.