TITLE: AN ACCOUNT OF RAJI AND HIS SONS

Vaishampayana said:—O king, Ayu had five sons who were all heroic and
mighty car-warriors. They were begotten on Swarbhānu’s daughter (1). Of
them Nahusha was born first and next to him Vriddhasharmā. Afterwards
Rambha, Raji and Anena were born; they were all well-known in the three
worlds (2). Raji begat five hundred sons who were known on earth by the
name of Rājeyas. Those Kshatriyas made even Indra terrified (3). When
the terrible battle, between the gods and demons, came to pass they went
to the Grandfather and said "O lord of all the gods, say who amongst us
will be crowned with victory. We wish to hear it from you (4-5)."

Brahma said:—"Forsooth they will conquer the three worlds on whose
behalf the king Raji will take up arms in battle (6). Wherever Raji is,
there is forbearance; and wherever forbearance reigns there is
prosperity. And wherever forbearance and prosperity are there exist
morality and victory (7)." O foremost of Bharatas, pleased with what
they heard from the Grandfather, the gods and demons, with a view to
gain victory, went to Raji for making him their commander (8). Raji was
the grandson of Swarbhānu and was begotten on his daughter Prabhā. That
highly powerful king multiplied the race of Soma (9). The gods and
demons, all with delighted minds, said to Raji:—"Do you, for
accomplishing own victory, take up a most excellent bow and arrows
(10)". Then identifying his own interest with that of theirs and
displaying his own glory the king Raji said to the gods and demons (11).
"O Indra and gods, I shall then only engage in fight if I can attain to
the dignity of Indra after vanquishing the demons in battle (12)." The
gods were at first delighted and said, "O king, whatever you wish it
will be; your desire shall be fulfilled (13)." Hearing the words of the
gods the king Raji said to the leading Asuras what he had spoken to the
gods (14). Thinking it conducive to their own interest the haughty
Dānavas, with great indignation, replied to that king (15). "Pralhāda is
our lord for whom we seek victory. O foremost of kings, fulfill the
contract that you have made with the gods for obtaining the kingdom
(16)." Having said ’so be it’ he was appointed by the gods (their
commander). Then entering upon the contract that he would become Indra
the king slew all the Dānavas whom the wielder of thunderbolt could not
kill (17). Having brought about the destruction of all the Dānavas the
highly beautiful, powerful and self-controlled king Raji regained the
lost prosperity of the gods (18). Then Satakratu,⁵⁶ with all the gods,
said to Raji "I am Raji’s son." He again addressed him saying:—"Forsooth
you have become the lord of all creatures, O sire, I, Indra, have become
your son and I shall gain renown by this action" (19–20). Hearing the
words of Satakratu and having been imposed on by his Māyā the king Raji
delightedly said to the king of gods "Let it be so" (21). After the
ascension to heaven of that god-like king his sons took away from the
lord of gods his celestial kingdom following the practice that ancestral
properties should be equally distributed amongst all the sons (22).
Raji’s five hundred sons simultaneously attacked Trivisthapa and the
celestial kingdom of Indra (23). After the lapse of many years the king
of gods, being deprived of his kingdom and share in the sacrificial
offerings, grew very feeble. He then said to Vrihaspati "O Brahmarshi,
do thou arrange for me clarified butter of the weight of a Jujube fruit
so that I may live on its strength (24–25). O lord, having snatched away
my kingdom from me the sons of the king Raji have made me emaciated,
absent-minded, shorn of seat and energy, weak and stupid" (26).

Vrihaspati said:—"O sinless one, if you had said this to me before I
would not have been required to do an unfair work for your well-being
(27). I shall however, O king of gods, surely strive to do you good and
you will soon regain your kingdom and due share of the sacrificial
offerings (28). O my child, I will make arrangements for this and let
not your mind be possessed by stupefaction." He then did something for
increasing the energy of the king of gods (29). The foremost of the
twice-born then brought about the derangement of their (Raji’s sons’)
understanding. For this purpose he wrote a treatise on atheism, the best
of all works on Tarka, dealing with attacks against religion and much
liked by the impious. Those, who regard religion as the supreme (end of
life), do not like this system (30–31). Listening to the contents of
that treatise written by Vrihaspati the ignorant sons of Raji began
expressing their disgust at the previous works on Dharma sāstra (32).
They began respecting highly that atheistical system of their preceptor.
By this irreligious act those sinners met with destruction (33). Having
gained, by the favour of Vrishapati, the kingdom of the three worlds
which it is so hard to acquire the king of gods was highly pleased (34).
The sons (of the king Raji) grew foolish, maddened with anger and
irreligious. They began to hate the Brāhmanas and were shorn of energy
and prowess. Thereupon slaying those sons of Raji possessed by anger and
lust the king of the celestials regained his prosperity and kingdom
(35-36). He, who listens to or meditates on the account of the loss of
kingdom by the king of gods and of the restitution of his prestige, is
never visited by any oppression (37).

⁵⁶ Literally performer of hundred sacrifices, a name of Indra.