TITLE: THE CHILDISH FREAKS OF KRISHNA

Vaishampayana said:—As time went on those two boys, named Krishna and
Sangkarshana, began to crawl on their legs. Those two beautiful boys,
resembling the rising sun, the same person in two bodies, as if turned
out by one mould, began to assume the same form, to lie down on the same
bed, to live on the same food, and to put on the same dress. They thus
sported there like boys (1–3). Those two great energies, identical with
the witness of the worlds, although of one body, assumed two human forms
for the destruction of the demons and for accomplishing the only great
work of the resuscitation of sacrifices. Although they were the
protectors of the entire universe they were born, for this, as cow-herds
(4-5). While they sported there they appeared like the sun and moon in
the sky possessed by each other’s rays (6). Going every where, they,
having arms like serpents, appeared like two proud young elephants
covered with dust (7). And sometimes with their persons pasted with
ashes and powdered cow-dung they shone like two princes of fire (8).
Sometimes they used to walk on knees and enter cow-sheds and used to
sport there with their persons and hairs covered with cow-dung (9).
Sometimes committing mischiefs to the inhabitants of Vraja those two
boys used to create the delight of their sire with their laughing (10).
Those two beautiful boys, of moon-like countenances, used to appear more
charming when filled with curiosity and their locks disturbing their
eyes (11). They grew exceedingly playful and naughty and used to walk
all over Vraja. And Nanda could not (by any means) check them (12). One
day Yasoda, worked up with anger, brought the lotus-eyed Krishna near
the carriage. And fastening a rope round his waist and tying it to a
mortar she repeatedly remonstrating with him, said "Go, if you are
capable of doing it." Saying this she engaged in her work (13–14). When
Yashodā was engaged in her household works, Krishna, with a view to
surprise the inhabitants of Vraja and play, issued out of the courtyard
(15).

Going out of the courtyard with that mortar Krishna went to the forest
where the huge trees Yamala and Arjuna were (16). Placing that mortar
between the two trees he began to drag it. For his thus dragging it the
mortar was firmly fixed at the root of the trees. He then began to drag
the trees Arjuna and Yamala. Being thus drawn by him with great force
those two Arjuna trees were uprooted with their roots and branches. In
order to show this to the milk-men the Lord, resorting to his heavenly
strength, began to laugh there. That rope, by his power, became stronger
(17-19). The milk-women, who were then going to the bank of the river
Yamunā, saw the child in that condition and were filled with wonder. And
weepingly they approached Yashodā (20). The women, with sorry faces,
said to her:—"Tarry not a moment, O Yashodā and come with us quickly
(21). The two huge trees, that are being worshipped as gods on account
of their granting objects of desire, have fallen on your son (22). Being
bound by a rope like a calf under the belly (of the cow) your boy is
laughing between the two trees (23). Get up and go, O foolish woman. You
think you are wise but you are stupid. Your son is alive as if he has
been released from the mouth of Death" (14).

(Hearing this) she was stricken with fear and began to bewail. She then
went where the two trees were uprooted (25). She saw there her child
placed between the two trees with the rope round his waist and dragging
the mortar (26). All the milk-men and women, aged or youthful, of Vraja
went there quickly to witness this wonderful scene (27). Those milk-men,
who range in the forest, began to speak amongst themselves "Who has
uprooted these two huge trees as if forming the extent of our village
(28)? There is no storm, no rain, no fall of thunderbolt and no mischief
created by elephants. Then why have these two trees, all on a sudden,
fallen down (29)? Alas! being felled down on the ground these two trees
are shorn of beauty like clouds divested of water. O Nanda, these two
Arjuna trees are very favourably disposed towards you and bent upon
doing you good. Although they are huge they have fallen in such a way
saving your child that his body has not been wounded in the least
(30–31). Before this Putanā had been slain and the carriage broken. And
this uprooting of the trees is the third portend in Vraja (32). It is
not meet for the milkmen to live any longer in this village, for these
portends do not auger well" (33).

Thereupon releasing the lotus-eyed Krishna from the mortar, taking him
up on his lap and looking at him again and again as if he had returned
from the land of the dead Nanda could not attain to the consummation of
happiness. Remonstrating then with Yashoda, he, followed by all
milk-men, returned to Vraja (34–35). From that day in which he was bound
with the rope Krishna was called _Dāmodara_ by all the milk-men of that
village (36). O foremost of Bharatas, while living amongst milk-men,
although a mere boy, he performed all these wonderful feats²⁰⁵ (37).

²⁰⁵ These miracles of Krishna’s early life have been also described in
 _Srimadbhagavatam_, the greatest of all Vaishnava works. They have
 been recorded with the purpose of showing Krishna’s superhuman
 power. The Hindus regard him as the incarnation of Vishnu and
 these miracles are meant to show that unless he had divinity in
 him he could not have performed these wonderful feats. The early
 writers took a special fancy for recording wonderful deeds
 performed by their hero for proving his superhuman power and
 origin. It was not only a practice with the early Hindu authors
 but was so with the western writers too. The miracles, of the Old
 Testament, will attest this argument. The early life, of Krishna,
 when he worked these miracles, is described in three most
 important works, Vishnupurana, Bhagvatpurana and Harivamsha.