TITLE: ARRANGEMENT OF THE CELESTIAL ARMY

Vaishampayana said:—O my child, you have thus heard of the arrangement
of the Daitya army in the war between the gods and demons. Hear, now of
an account of the arrangement of the army of the gods as well as that of
Vishnu’s army (1). The Adityas, the Vasus, the Rudras and the two highly
powerful Aswinis took charge of their respective soldiers and
attendants. The commander of the whole celestial army, the thousand-eyed
Patriarch Pākashāna sat on his elephant Airavata in front (of the army).
On his left was kept in readiness a car, quick coursing like Garuda,
with beautiful wheels and adorned with gold and diamonds (2-4).
Thousands of gods and Gandharvas and Yakshas followed him. And the
effulgent Brāhmana saints, members of his court, began to chant his
glories (5). Protected by Valāhakas, carrying weapons, accompanied by
lightnings produced by the hurling of Indra’s thunder-bolt and
resembling mountains moving about at will, the Divine Maghavān began to
proceed on his elephant. The Vipras, who live at a place where Havi is
kept in Soma’s sacrifice, sing his glories (6-7). When the king of gods
repaired to the celestial region bugles were sounded. Thousands of
Apsaras began to dance before him (8). As the sun shines, protected by
Ketu, born in his own family so that chariot, protected by Mātali,¹⁴⁹
appeared beautiful. That car, drawn by a thousand horses, was fleet like
the mind or the air. It appeared as if the mount Meru was enveloped with
the rays of the sun (9-10). Raising up his rod and mace and terrifying
the Daityas Yama stood in the midst of the celestial army (11). Varuna,
with the mace in his hand, also stood there in the midst of the army of
gods. He was surrounded by four oceans and Pannagas. His person was full
of water and he was adorned with conch, jems and Angadas.¹⁵⁰ He always
used to roam with the noose of Kāla in his hand. He made thousands of
sports with the horses resembling the rays of the moon and waves
agitated by the wind. His raiment was black and he put on beautiful
Angadas made of corals. His person had the hue of sapphire and a
necklace hung round his neck. He stood there in expectation of the
battle as the ocean becomes agitated when it is separated from its bank
(12–15). Kuvera, having a body dark-blue like sapphire, and men to carry
him, was seen there along with the Yakshas, Rākshasas and Guhyakas (16).
That lord of riches, that king of kings, was armed with conch, Padma¹⁵¹
and a club (17). That graceful king of riches¹⁵² was stationed in his
car Pushpaka. That king of kings, that friend of Siva, that lord having
men to carry him, appeared there for battle like the very Siva himself
(18). The thousand-eyed Indra protected the eastern wing of the
celestial army, Yama, the king of the ancestral manes, protected the
southern wing, Varuna, the western wing and Kuvera, the northern wing
(19). The four Regents of the quarters, dreadful in battle, protected
the four sides of the celestial army and kept a vigilant watch over
their respective quarters. (20). The sun shone there burning in his own
effulgent rays, on his car, drawn by seven horses that course in the
welkin (21), Shining in his own effulgence of thousand rays, and
ascending the car in which he, conferring heat on all the eternal
regions, goes to the rising and setting mountains, the _Dwādashātma_¹⁵³
lord of rays began to move about in the midst of the celestials (23–24).
Delighting the universe with his cool and watery rays the moon, of cool
rays, shone on his car drawn by white horses (24). The Danavas saw, in
the battle-field, Soma, of cool rays who is the presiding deity of the
Brāhmanas, is encircled by the stars, whose body is marked by the shadow
of the earth, who dispells the nocturnal darkness, who is the lord of
all luminous bodies in the sky, who is the source of all the juices, who
is the lord and protector of all the plants, who is the source of
nectar, who is the first source of food to the world, who is identical
with gentle and cool juice and who distributes dews (25–27). Being
excited by his own energy and joined by the cloud Vayu, the life of all
creatures, began to blow there in contrary directions and assail the
Daityas. He is the life of all creatures and lives in man as five vital
airs; and being divided into seven it is sustaining the three worlds
consisting of mobile and immobile creations. People call him the
charioteer of fire and he is the cause and, lord of all. The source of
his origin is the seven musical notes which are used in singing. He is
called the most excellent element and is bodiless. He courses in the
sky, goes very quickly and has sound for his origin (28–39). The Maruts,
accompanied by the Devas, Gandharvas and Vidyadharas, began to sport
there with unsheathed swords white as the serpents (32). Pouring, in
anger, deadly venom the leading serpents became as it were the arrows of
the gods, and began, with their mouths open, to range in the sky (33).
All the mountains appeared before the gods to grind the Dānavas with
their rocky summits and with trees consisting of hundreds of branches
(34). The highly illustrious and intelligent lord Hari, the holder of
discus and mace, who is the lotus-navelled Hrishikesha of three
foot-steps, who is highly effulgent like the fire of dissolution, who is
the master of the universe, who is Madhusudana, born from the ocean, who
feeds on Havya and is honored by sacrifies, who is identical with earth,
water and ether, who is at one with the elements, who gives peace and
equanimity of mind, who destroys his enemies, who is the source and seed
of the universe, who is the preceptor of the world and who has the
emblem of Garuda on his flag, took up, in the midst of the celestial
army, his enemy-killing discus, effulgent like the rising fire in the
rising solar disc, the maces Vrihati and Mahati, that kill all the
Asuras, in his left hand, the bow Sranga and other burning weapons in
his remaining hands. The Lord Hari rode that huge-bodied younger brother
of Aruna, the foremost of birds, Suparna, who was the best of the twice
born living on serpents, who was the son of Kashyapa, who was superior
even to the wind in fleetness, who used to agitate the sky, who had big
serpents hanging from his mouth, who was huge like the mount Mandara
that was set free after the churning of the ocean for ambrosia, who
displayed his prowess hundreds of times in the encounter between the
gods and demons, whose body was marked with thunder-bolt by the king of
gods for ambrosia, who had tufts of down, who was adorned with shining
ear-rings, who had a raiment of variegated feathers, who was huge like a
mountain consisting of metals and who had on his spacious breast
serpents of moon-like lustre shining with brilliant jems. He remained
easily in the sky with his two beautifully painted wings like two clouds
with rain-bow at the time of the universal dissolution. He was dreadful
in the enemy’s camp adorned with red, dark and yellow flags. The gods
followed him in battle. The great ascetics sang the glories of Gadādhara
with excellent hymns (35–48). Assisted by Kuvera, headed by Vivaswan’s
son Yama, encircled by Varuna the king of water, presided over by the
king of gods, beautified by the rays of the moon, strengthened by the
war-like gods, accompanied by the sounds of the wind, rendered brilliant
by fire, and enveloped with Jishnu, Prahishnu, Bhrājishnu, and Vishnu
energies the celestial army stood wonderfully for the battle. Angiras
prayed for the well-being of the gods and Sukra, the preceptor of the
Daityas, prayed for their well-being (49–52).

¹⁴⁹ The charioteer of Indra.

¹⁵⁰ A kind of ornament for the Arms.

¹⁵¹ One of Kuvera’s treasures or jems.

¹⁵² The word in the text is _Nidhipati_ a name of Kuvera. _Nidhi_
 means divine treasures nine of which are enumerated, _viz._, the
 Padma, Mahapadma, Sankha, Makara, Kachchpa, Mukunda, Nanda, Nila
 and Kharba: their nature is not exactly defined though some of
 them appear to be precious jems; according to the Tankrik system,
 they are personified and worshipped as demigods attendant either
 upon Kuvera or upon Lakshmi, the goddess of prosperity.

¹⁵³ An appellation of the sun. _Dwadasha_, twelve and _Atman_ means
 identity; being represented in and identified with the twelve
 _Adityas_ or the sun in each month of the year.