TITLE: THE SPORT OF THE YADUS CONTINUED

Vaishampāyana said:—Having lost all control over himself and his
movements for drinking Kadamvari wine and with his eyes reddened the
highly beautiful Bala, of large arms pasted with sandal, began to sport
with Revati (1). As the full moon shines in a cloud so clad in raiments
black like clouds the divine Rāma, fair like the rays of the moon and
with eyes rolling in intoxication, shone there (2). With Kundala on his
left ear only and adorned with beautiful lotuses, the smiling Rāma
attained to an excess of delight by repeatedly looking at the
countenance of his beloved consort adorned with side-long looks (3).

Thereupon at the command of Keshava, the destroyer of Kansa and
Nikumbha, the beautiful Apsaras approached the holder of ploughshare
prosperous like heaven itself for beholding Revati and Rāma (4). Those
beautiful-bodied Apsaras, endued with charming physical frames, saluted
Revati and Rāma and began to dance in accompaniment with time. And some
of them sang with gestures expressive of every sort of emotion (5).
According to the command of Baladeva and the daughter of the Ravata king
they began to display various gestures acquired by them as desired by
the Yadavas (6). Having dressed themselves after the women of the
country of the Yādavas those thin-built and beautiful damsels sang, in
their language, songs set to thou sands of tunes (7). O hero, before
that assembly they sang various sacred themes conducive to the pleasure
of Rāma and Keshava, such as the destruction of Kansa, Pralamva, and
Chanura; the story of Janārddana’s being tied to the mortar for which
his glory was established by Yashodā and he obtained the name of
Damodara; the destruction of Aristha and Dhenuka; his residence in
Vraja; the destruction of Putana; his uprooting of the trees Yamala and
Arjuna; his creation of wolves in time, the suppression of the wicked
king of serpents Kalya by Krishna in the lake; the return of Madhusudana
from that lake with lotuses, lilies, conches and Nidhis; the upholding
of the mount Govardhana for the benefit of Gokula by Keshava, the source
of well-being to the world; how Krishna cured the hump-backed woman, the
seller of powdered scents; these accounts of the Lord shorn of birth and
imperfections. The Apsaras also described how the Lord, though not a
dwarf Himself, assumed the most wretched dwarfish form; how Soubha was
slain; how Baladeva held up his ploughshare in all these battles; the
destruction of other enemies of the gods; the battle with the proud
kings at the time of the wedding of the Gāndhāra princess; the carrying
away of Subhdrā; the battle with Vālāhaka and Jamvumāli; and how he
carried away all the jewels in the very presence of Sakra after
defeating him (7-14). O king, while those beautiful women were singing
all these and various other themes pleasant and delightful to
Sangkarshana and Adhokshaja, the highly beautiful Balarāma, drunk with
Kadamvari wine, began to sing with his wife Revati accompanied with
sweet clapping of hands (15-16). Beholding Rāma sing thus, the
intelligent, high-souled and highly powerful Madhusudana, in order to
please him, began to sing with Satya (17). The greatest hero of the
world, Pārtha, who had come there for the sea-voyage, also delightedly
joined the beautiful Subhadrā and Krishna in their singing (18). O king,
the intelligent Gada, Sārana, Pradyumna, Shāmva, Satyaki and the son of
Satyarjit, the greatly powerful Chārudeshna also sang there in a chorus.
Rāma’s sons, the greatest of heroes, the princes Nishatha and Ulmukha,
the commander, Akrura, Sankha and other leading Bhaimas also sang there
(19-20).

At that time, O king, by Krishna’s power the boats increased in size and
Janarddana sang to his best along with the leading Bhaimas (21). O
heroic prince, when the immortal-like Yadu chiefs sang in this way the
whole world was filled with joy and sins were dissipated (23). Thereupon
for pleasing Keshava, the slayer of Madhu, Narada, the guest of the
celestials, began to sing in such a way amongst the Yadavas that a
portion of his matted hairs melted away (23). O prince, composing the
songs there and then, that Muni, of immeasurable energy, sang them
amongst the Bhaimas again and again with various gestures and motions
(24). Thereupon beholding Baladeva, the daughter of the king Revata,
Keshava, Pritha’s son, Satyabhānā and Subhadrā, the intelligent Rishi
smiled repeatedly (25). Although the wives of Keshava were patient by
nature still the intelligent Nārada, ever fond of joking, with his
gestures, smiles, motions and with various other means which could
excite their laughter, made them laugh (26). As if instructed the Divine
Muni Nārada sang various tunes high and low; and for pleasing Krishna he
began to laugh aloud and shed tears of joy (27). O Prince, then the
youthful damsels, conversant with gestures, gave away, at Krishna’s
command, the best jewels of the world, beautiful raiments, garlands made
in heaven, Santānaka flowers, pearls and other flowers born in all
seasons (28–29).

Thereupon after the termination of the musical soiree the Divine
Krishna, holding the great and incomparable Muni Nārada, by the hand,
jumped into the ocean with Satyabhāmā and Arjuna (30). Smiling a little
the highly beautiful Krishna, of incomparable prowess, said to Sini’s
son—"Let us form ourselves into two parties and sport in the water of
the ocean with the damsels. In this water of the ocean let Baladeva and
Revati with my sons and some of the Bhaimas form one party and let the
remaining Bhaimas and Bala’s sons join my party" (31–32).

Afterwards the highly confident Keshava said to the ocean stationed
before him with folded hands:—"Ocean, let your water be sweet and shorn
of sharks (33). May your bed be adorned with jems and may your banks be
worthy of a happy touch by the two feet. And may you, by my power, give
all that you know of suited to the taste of mankind (34). May you give
every sort of drink liked by people and may gentle fishes, adorned with
gold, sapphires and pearls, range in your water (35). May you hold jems,
and fragrant, charming and red lotuses and lilies of sweet touch and
served by bees (36). May you hold numerous jars and golden vessels, from
which the Bhaimas will drink, of Maireya, Mādhvika, and Asava wines
(37). O ocean, be thou of cold water fragrant with the scent of flowers.
Be thou so very careful that Yādavas with their women may not suffer any
inconvenince (38)".

O king, having said this to the ocean Krishna began to sport with
Arjuna. Satrajit’s daughter, well-read in hints given by Krishna,
sprinkled water on Narada’s body (39). Thereupon Rāma, his body reeling
with intoxication, held lustfully, with his own hands, those of Revati
and jumped sportively into the water of the ocean (40). Following Rāma
the sportive sons of Krishna, with their eyes rolling in intoxication
and the other leading Bhaimas, shorn of their unguents, raiments and
ornaments, delightedly jumped into the ocean. Nishatha, Ulmuka and other
sons of Baladeva with garlands of Santānaka flowers around their neck,
clad in variegated raiments, drunk and bent on sporting, as well as the
remaining Bhaimas joined Keshava’s party (41-42). The powerful Yadavas,
having beautiful marks and pastes on their persons, with watering
vessels in their hands, began to sing songs of sweet tunes and
beautifully suited for that place (43). Afterwards hundreds of well
dressed damsels, fond of music, united with Apsarās living in the
celestial region, began to play various notes (44). Those youthful
damsels, conversant with playing instruments in the water of the
etherial Ganges, and having their minds fully possessed by Cupid,
delightedly played on _Jaladaraura_³⁰¹ and sang songs in accompaniment
with it (45). At that time the beautiful celestial dancing girls, having
eyes like lotus petals and adorned with lotus stalks, assumed the beauty
of lotuses blown by the rays of the sun (46). O king, filled with the
moon-like faces of those women appearing like hundreds of full moon,
either going there of their own accord or under the decree of the
Providence, the ocean appeared like the sky adorned with a thousand
moons (47). O king, the cloud-like ocean was beautified with lighting
like woman. The lord of waters appeared like clouds in the sky dispersed
by lightning (48).

Thereupon Nārāyana, who had put beautiful marks on his body, Nārada and
other members of his party sprinkled water on Baladeva and his party who
had also put on beautiful marks. And the latter also sprinkled water on
the former (49). At that time the wives of Krishna and Sangkarshana, out
of intoxication caused by Vāruni wine and worked up with music,
delightedly threw water upon one another with hands and watering
instruments (50). The Bhaimas, possessed by wine, Cupid and
self-dignity, with eyes reddened with intoxication, threw water upon one
another and in this way assumed harsh attitude before the very presence
of the ladies: they did not desist although they sported for a long time
(51).

Beholding thus their too much familiar intercourse, Krishna, the holder
of discus, thought for a moment and then prevented them. He too, with
Pārtha and Nārada, desisted from playing on instruments in the water
(52). The Bhaimas, ever affording delight to their beloved women,
although they were highly sensitive, at once understood Krishna’s
intention as soon as he gave hints and desisted from playing in the
water: but the damsels continued dancing (53). After the termination of
the dancing party Upendra got upon the shore even while the other
Yadavas were in the water. He then gave the best of Munis Nārada
becoming unguents and afterwards himself partook of them (54). Then
beholding Upendra get out of water the incomparable Bhaimas soon left
the water. Then purifying their persons with unguents, they, with the
permission of Krishna, retired to the drinking ground (55). Seated there
in order according to their age and position those well-known heroes
refreshed themselves with diverse edibles and drinks (56). Thereupon the
cooks, with great pleasure, brought there cooked meat, vinegar,
pomegranates and meat of beasts fried on iron rods (57). Then a young
buffalo, well-roasted on a rod, hot, soaked in clarified butter, and
mixed with vinegar, _Sochal_ salt and acid, was served (58). Meat of
many fat deer roasted according to the process of skillful cooking, and
sweetened with vinegar was next brought (59). Legs of beasts, mixed with
salt and mustard and fried in clarified butter were also served (60).
The incomparable Yādavas, with great pleasure, partook of those dishes
with the roots of Arum campanulatum, pomegranates, common citrons,
asafaetida, gingerade and other fragrant vegetables. They then drank in
beautiful cups (61). Encircled by their beloved damsels they drank
various wines such as Maireya, Madhvika and Asava prepared from the meat
of birds roasted on a rod with clarified butter, acid juice, salt and
sourish articles (62). They also partook of other side dishes, various
fragrant salted edibles of white and red colour, curd and preparations
of clarified butter (63). O king, Uddhava, Bhoja, and other heroes, who
did not drink, delightedly took vegetables, vegetable-curries, cakes,
curd and pudding (64). From the drinking vessel named Pālavi, they drank
various fragrant drinks, milk and butter with sugar and took various
sorts of fruits (65). In this way the heroic Bhaimas were pleased with
eating to their fill. Afterwards, they, having their wives as their
companions, joined the music again with pleasure, initiated by their
consorts (66).

Thereupon when the night set in the Divine Upendra asked all present in
the party to go on with the song. _Chhālikya_ of various tunes sung by
the gods and Gandharvas (67). O king, then Narada began to play on his
Vinā which with six scales and _Ragas_³⁰² brings about the concentration
of mind, Krishna began to perform _Hallishaka_³⁰³ accompanied with the
music of his flute and Pārtha began to play on his _Mridanga_:³⁰⁴ other
leading Apsaras played on various other instruments. Thereupon after
Asārita, the beautiful Rambhā, a clever actress, rose up, played and
pleased Rāma and Keshava. Afterwards, O king, Urvashi, having beautiful
and expansive eyes, Himā, Mishrakeshi, Tilottamā, Menakā and other
celestial actresses rose up in order and pleased Hari with singing and
dancing. Having his mind attracted by their charming singing and dancing
Vāsudeva pleased them all with presents after their own heart. O prince,
those honorable and leading Apsaras, who had been brought there, were
honored with betel leaves at the desire of Krishna (68–72). O king, thus
the various fragrant fruits and the song Chhālikya, which were brought
from the celestial region out of Krishna’s desire and his favour towards
mankind, were known only to the intelligent son of Rukshmini. It was he
who could use them: and it was he who distributed betel leaves at that
time (73–74). The Chhālikya song, conducive to the well-being,
nourishment, and prosperity of Nārāyana of glorious deeds, and which was
great, auspicious and productive of fame and piety to mankind, was sung
in chorus by Indra-like Krishna, Rāma, Pradyumna, Anuvindha and Shamva
(75–76). This Chhalikya, which was sung there, was capable of bearing
the axle of virtue and destructive of sorrow and sin. Repairing to the
celestial region and hearing this Chhālikya song the illustrious king
Revata regarded four thousand Yugas as one day. From it originated the
various divisions of the Gandharvas as _Kumarajati_, &c., (77–78), O
king, as hundreds of lights are produced by one light so various classes
of Gandharvas have emanated from Chhālikya. O king, with Pradyumna and
other leading Bhaimas Krishna and Nārada knew all this (79). Like unto
streams and the water of the ocean people of this world knew Chhalikya
only by illustration. It is possible to know the virtues and weight of
the Himalaya but it is not so, without practising hard austerities to
know the _Murchanā_³⁰⁵ and time of Chhalikya (80–81). O king, what of
Chhālikya with six scales and _Ragas_ men, with great difficulty, cannot
even come to the end of its eleventh division _Sukumarajati_. Know it
for certain, O king, that the slayer of Madhu had so arranged that the
gods, Gandharvas and great Rishis might attain to a devotional spirit on
account of the virtues of Chhālikya (82–83). On account of its being
sung by the god, amongst men, Krishna, before the Bhaimas for showing
favour unto the world, Chhālikya, sung by the immortals only, attained
to such a celebrity, that formerly on the occasion of a festivity Bhaima
boys used to cite it as an example. And the elders used to approve of
their saying and the boys, youths and old men used to sing it in a
chorus. "Love is the test and not age"—to remind the mortals of this
virtue of their own race, the heroic Yādavas, the ordainers of ancient
religious rites, did so in the land of mortals. O king, friendship is
known by love; therefore keeping love before them, the other Vrishnis,
Andhakas and Dāsharhas, except Keshava, used to treat their own sons
even as friends. Thereupon saluting the delighted Madhusudana, the
slayer of Kansa, the contented Apsaras returned to the celestial region
which too was (accordingly) filled with joy (84–88).

³⁰¹ A kind of musical instrument played in water.

³⁰² A mode of music of which six are enumerated viz. _Bhairava_,
 _Malava Saranga_, _Hindola_, _Vasanta_, _Dipaka_ and _Megha_: they
 are personified in poetry and mythology.

³⁰³ A minor dramatic entertainment chiefly of singing and dancing by
 one male and eight or ten female performers, a ballet.

³⁰⁴ A kind of musical instrument.

³⁰⁵ A tone or semitone as placed in its scale, the seventh part of a
 Grama or scale.