TITLE: THE INCARNATIONS OF VISHNU

Vaishampayana said:—O my child, the question that you have put regarding
Hari, the holder of Sranga bow, is indeed very great. Listen, I shall
still describe the glory of Vishnu as much as lies in my power(1).
Fortunately for you that our mind is bent upon listening to Vishnu’s
prowess. Hear, I shall describe the celestial origin of the lord (2).
The Brāhmanas, well read in the Vedas, describe him as having a thousand
eyes, thousand faces, thousand feet, thousand heads, thousand hands, as
eternal, as having thousand tongues, as effulgent, as wearing thousand
crowns, as giving away thousands presents, as having thousand origins
and thousand arms (3–4); as sacrifice, oblation, Havya,¹²³ Hotā,¹²⁴ the
sacred vessels, the sacrificial altar, the initiation, charu,¹²⁵ Sruva
(5); as Sruk, Soma, Shurpa,¹²⁶ Musala,¹²⁷ Prakshanam, Dakshināyanam,¹²⁸
Adveryu, Sāmaga Brāhmana, as Sadasya,¹²⁹ Sadanam Sadas¹³⁰ (6); as Yupa,
Samid, Kusha, Darvi,¹³¹ Chamasa, Ulukhala, Prāgvangsham,¹³² sacrifice,
sacrificial ground, priest and Chayana¹³³ (7); as the small and big
chariots, as the mobile creation, as the penance, as the good fruit
thereof, as Sthandila¹³⁴ and Kushā (8); as _Mantra_, as fire that
carries sacrificial offering, as Bhāga,¹³⁵ Bhagavaha,¹³⁶ Agrebhuj,¹³⁷
Somabhuj,¹³⁸ Ghritarchi,¹³⁹ Udaniya¹⁴⁰ (9); and in the sacrifice as the
eternal Lord. That intelligent Lord of gods, Vishnu, having the mystic
mark of Srivātsa on his breast, incarnated himself in thousands of
forms. And thousands of his incarnations shall take place in future,
Brahmā has said this (10-11). O great king, I shall describe at length,
as accosted by you, the sacred and celestial theme, why the Divine lord
Vishnu, the king of gods and the slayer of his enemies, took his birth
leaving the celestial region, in the race of Vasudeva. For encompassing
the well-being of the gods and men and the prosperity of all the worlds,
the Soul of all, for a great work of his own, went through various
incarnations (12–14). I shall describe the sacred and celestial
incarnations of the Lord fraught with many virtues that have been
recorded in metres and great Srutis (15). Purifying yourself and
controlling your speech, listen to them, O Janamejaya. This highly
sacred Purāna is equal to the Vedas (16). Hear, I shall describe this
celestial story of Vishnu. O Bharata, whenever virtue suffers
deterioration the Lord, for establishing it, incarnates Himself (17). O
great king, he had one form partaking of the quality of goodness. In
this form He is constantly practising hard austerities in Heaven (18).
His second form¹⁴¹ is possessed by yoga sleep for bringing about the
destruction of creatures; and from this sleep originate persons of
misconceived spiritual culture (19). Having slept for a thousand _yugas_
He again appears for work. And after the completion of a thousand
_yugas_, the god of gods, the lord of the universe, Vishnu, the
Grandfather Brahmā, the Regents of all the worlds, the moon, the sun,
the fire, Brahma, Kapila, Paramesthi, the gods, the seven Rishis, the
highly illustrious, three-eyed god Siva, the air, the oceans and the
mountains exist in His form (20–22). The great Sanatkumar and the
high-souled Manu, the father of creation (also exist in His form). That
ancient Lord, effulgent like the fire, has created all the forms (23).
After the destruction of all creatures mobile and immobile, after the
destruction of the gods and demons, serpents and Rakshasas that highly
powerful Purusha killed the two irrepressible Dānavas, Madhu and Kaitava
in the midst of the ocean and conferred upon them the boon of final
liberation (24-25).

While in the days of yore the lotus-navelled Lord lay in the water of
the ocean there sprang from His navel the gods and the Rishis (26). This
is the Lotus incarnation of the Lord as recorded in the Vedas and Srutis
(27). Next the Boar incarnation of the Lord is recorded in Srutis, where
Vishnu, the foremost of the celestials, assumed the form of a boar and
raised up the earth with her forests and mountains, with His tusks sunk
in the all-spreading ocean. The (four) Vedas were his feet, the
sacrificial altar was his tusk, the sacrifices were his teeth, the
funeral pile was his mouth, the fire was his tongue, and the Darbhas
were the hairs of his body. The great ascetic Brahmā was his head, the
days and nights were the eyes of that eldest Purusha, the various
divisions of the Vedas were the ornaments of his ears, the progenitors
were his nose, the chanting of the Sama Veda was his great voice. He was
identical with virtue and truth. Penance was his nostril; dreadful
beasts were his nails and he had long arms. The air was his soul, the
_mantra_ was his hip, the sanctified Soma juice was his blood, the
sacrificial altars were his shoulders. Havi was his smell, Havy and
Kavya were his energies, Nagvangsha was his body. He was effulgent and
sanctified by various forms of initiation. Dakshinā or gift was his
heart. He was ascetic and great and the recitation of the Vedic hymns
was the ornament of his lips. The great heroes, who stand in the way of
virtue, were his ornaments. The various metres were his motion. The
sacred Upanishad was his seat. The image of his wife was his help and he
was tall like the summit of the mount Meru. This thousand-headed Prime
Deity re-established the earth (28–37). Thus in the days of yore for
encompassing the well-being of creatures the Lord, assuming the shape of
a sacrificial boar, raised up the earth from the water of the ocean
(38). This is an account of the boar incarnation. Listen now to an
account of His man-lion incarnation where assuming the form of a lion he
killed Hiranyakashipu.

O king, in the days of yore in the golden age, the first of the Daityas
born, Hiranyakesipu, an enemy of the gods, practised most excellent
penances (40). Observing the vow of silence and steadfastly carrying it
on he alone, placed in the midst of water, spent eleven thousand and
five hundred years (41). O sinless one, thereupon Brahmā was pleased
with his self-control, equanimity of mind, asceticism and observance of
rules and the vow of celibacy (42). O great king then the lord of all,
the divine self-sprung Brahmā, the foremost of all, having the knowledge
of Brahman, himself, in his effulgent and sun like car drawn by swans,
came to him encircled by all the Adityas, Vasus, Sādhyas, Maruds, gods,
Rudras, Viswas, Yakshas, Rakshas, Kinnaras, rivers, oceans, stars,
Muhurthas, creatures ranging in the sky, planets, celestial saints, old
ascetic Siddhas, the seven Rishis, the great royal saints and Apsaras.
He then said to the Daitya:—"O you of firm vows, you are a disciple of
mine. I have been pleased with your asceticism. Pray for a boon; may you
fare well and acquire your wished-for objects (43–48)."

Hiranyakasipu said;—O grand-father, I pray for this boon, that the gods,
Asuras, Gandharvas, Yakshas, Nāgas, Rakshasas, men and goblins may not
by any means kill me and that the Rishis, when enraged, may not
imprecate a curse on me, and that the weapons, mountains, trees, dry or
wet articles or any other things may not bring about my destruction. Let
him alone be my destroyer who will be able, with his servants and army,
to kill me only with the strokes of his arms. I, myself, shall be the
moon, the sun, the air, the fire, air, ether, the stars, the ten
quarters, desire, anger, Varuna, Vāsava, Yama, the lord of riches and
Yaksha, the king of Kimpurushas (49-54).

Thus addressed by the king of Daityas, O emperor, the self-sprung Deity
smilingly said;—"O my child, I confer upon you these most wonderful and
celestial boons. Undoubtedly you will attain to all your desired-for
objects (55–56)." Having said this the divine grand-father repaired, by
the etherial region, to his habitation Vairaja resorted to by the
Brāhmana saints. Hearing that the water-sprung deity, the foremost of
the celestials, had conferred this celestial boon on Daitya-king
Hiranyakasipu, the gods, headed by Indra, communicated it to the
Creator. Hearing of this conferring of the boons the Devas, the Nāgas,
the Gandharvas and the Munis appeared before the grand-father (57–56).

The Gods said—"O lord, by this boon the Asura will oppress us. Be thou
propitiated and concert a measure for his destruction" (60). Hearing
those words beneficial unto all the lord Prajapati, the omniscient,
self-sprung Deity, the invisible and immortal creator of Havy, Kavya and
all other creatures said to the gods (61–62). "Forsooth he must attain
to the fruits of his asceticism. After he enjoys them the lord Vishnu
will kill him." Hearing these words from the lotus-sprung Deity all the
gods, filled with delight, repaired to their respective celestial
habitations (63–64). As soon as he obtained the boon the Daitya
Hiranyakasipu, elated with the pride thereof, began oppressing all the
creatures (65). He first of all carried his work of oppression on the
great, truthful and self-controlled Munis of firm vows living in the
hermitages (66). Having vanquished all the gods of the three worlds and
having brought them all under subjection the Daitya Hiranyakasipu lived
in the celestial region (67). As long as he, elated with pride, lived in
the celestial region the gods could not partake of the sacrificial
offerings and the Daityas were entitled thereto (68).

Thereupon the Adityas, Viswas and Vasus sought refuge with the highly
powerful Nārāyana Vishnu, the lord of protection, who is Brahman
identical with the gods and sacrifices, who is the presiding god of the
Brāhmanas, who is eternal, the present and past and future and who is
omniscient and adored of all the worlds (69–70).

The Gods said:—O. king of gods, O foremost of the celestials, do thou
save us from the fear of Hiranyakasipu. Thou art the Supreme Lord of us
all and of Brahmā and others. Thou art our Great God and Great
Preceptor. O thou having eyes like the full-blown lotuses, O thou the
destroyer of enemies, do thou become our help for bringing about the
destruction of the demons (71–72).

Vishnu said:—O ye immortals, do ye renounce your fear. I promise you
safety. O gods, you will, in no time, acquire as before the celestial
region. I will slay this king of Dānavas, elated with pride, who is
unslayable even by the immortals (73–74).

Vaishampāyana said:—Having said this and left the company of the king of
gods and others the Lord Hari assumed the form of a half-lion and a
half-man. Having pressed his one palm against another Hari, in his
man-lion form, repaired to the court of Hiranyakasipu (75–76). His
colour was like that of clouds and his voice was like the muttering
thereof. He also became effulgent and fleet like a cloud (77). He, with
his own hand, killed the highly powerful and proud Daitya, gifted with
the prowess of a tiger and protected by the mighty Daityas (78). This is
the man-lion incarnation. Next is that of a dwarf. Assuming this form
destructive of the Daityas in the days of yore the powerful Vishnu, with
his three foot steps, assailed the Asuras in the sacrifice of Bali
(79–80).

Viprachitti, Shivi, Sangkaraya, Shangku, Ayashirās, the powerful
Hayagriva, the fierce Ketumān, Ugra, Sogra, Vyagra, Mahāsura, Pushkara,
Pushkala, Sayoshya, Aswapati, Pralhāda, Aswasirā, Kumbha, Sanghrāda,
Gaganapriya, Amihrāda, Hari, Hara, Varāha, Sankara, Ruja, Sharabha,
Salabha, Kupana, Kopana, Kratha, Vrihatkirti, Mahāgihva, Sankukarna,
Mahāswana, Dirghajlbha, Arkanayana, Mriduchāpa, Mriduprya, Vāyu,
Garishtha, Namuchi, Saruvara, Vijvara Mahān, Chakrahanta, Krodhahantā,
Krodhavardhana, Kālaka, Kālakeya, Vritta, Krodha, Virochana, Garishtha,
Varistha, Pralamva, Naraka, Indratāpana, Vātāpi, Valadarpita, Ketumān,
Asiloma, Pulomā, Vāshkala, Pramada, Mada, Vaishika, Kālavadana, Kārala,
Koushika, Shara, Ekāksha, Chadrahā, Rahu, Sanhārāshwa, Mahiswan,
Shataghni, Chakrahasta, Parighapāni, demons with Ashma and Vindipāla
weapons in their hands, with those maces and mortars in their hands,
those with Parashwa weapon, maces, clubs spikes and various other
weapons in their hands, those assuming various dreadful forms, those
assuming the forms of tortoise and fowl, the faces of hares, asses,
camels, boars, dreadful Makaras, jackals, mice, frogs leopards, cats,
elephants, crocodiles, lambs, hogs, kine, buffaloes, Godhas, deer,
Garuda, those having faces like swords and peacocks, those having
armours made of the skin of elephants, some wearing antelope skin, some
covering their bodies with barks, some wearing head-dresses, some
wearing crowns, some wearing Asura ear-rings, some wearing Kiritins,
some with long tufts of hair, some with conch-like necks—thus a
numberless Daityas, wearing various dresses, adorned with diverse
garlands and taking up their burning weapons, surrounded on all sides
the powerful Hrishikesha (81-98). Assuming a highly dreadful form and
grinding them all with his hands and feet the Lord immediately freed the
earth of the demons (99). When he placed his foot-step on the earth, the
sun, and the moon remained on his breast, and when he placed his
foot-step in the sky they lay in his navel (100). And when he placed his
foot-step on a better place (than all these) they lay on the knees of
the highly powerful Vishnu. This has been related by the twice-born ones
(101). Having thus slain all the leading Asuras the Lord Vishnu, the
foremost of all the gods, saved the earth and conferred the celestial
kingdom on the king of gods (102). Thus have I described the dwarf
incarnation of the Great Vishnu. The Brāhmanas, well-read in the Vedas,
describe it as the glorious conduct of Vishnu (103).

The Great Vishnu, the soul of all, next incarnated himself as the highly
forgiving Dattātreya. When the gods disappeared, the religious works,
sacrifices and the four castes suffered deterioration, when truth was
lost and untruth flourished, when all the creatures were about to
perish, when virtue was on the verge of extinction the Lord
re-established the four Vedas with sacrifices as well as the four castes
(104-107). The boon-giving, intelligent Dattātreya conferred a boon on
the Haihaya king Kārtavirya, saying:–"O king, these your two arms, by
the power of my boon, shall be thousand-fold. O lord of the earth, you
will rule over the entire earth and be conversant with virtue. Your
enemies shall not be able to look at you" (108-110). O slayer of
enemies, O emperor, as heard by me, I have described to you the most
wonderful and auspicious incarnation of Vishnu. The Great Lord next
incarnated himself as Jāmadagni (111). In this incarnation Rāma killed
in battle Arjuna in the midst of his irrepressible army who were filled
with wonder at his thousand arms (112). Having brought the king Arjuna
on earth from his car and assailed that king roaring like clouds with
all his kinsmen, Bhrigu’s son Rāma chopped off his thousand arms with
his sword (113-114). The earth, adorned with the mountains Meru and
Mandara, contained _Kotis_ of Kshatryas. He divested the earth of the
Kshatryas for twenty one times (115). Having divested the earth of the
Kshatriyas the great ascetic son of Bhrigu undertook the celebration of
a horse-sacrifice for the expiation of all his sins (116). In that
sacrifice consisting of profuse gifts Bhrigu’s son, with great delight,
made a gift of the earth to Marichi’s son Kashyapa (117). In that horse
sacrifice the highly liberal and illustrious Rāma, the foremost of
car-warriors, made presents of quick-coursing horses, cars, endless
gold, kine and elephants (118). Even now practising hard austerities,
Bhrigu’s son, effulgent like a celestial, is living on the most
excellent mountain Mahendra (119). This is the account of the Jāmadagni
incarnation of the great and intelligent Vishnu, the foremost of gods,
bearing the mystic mark of Srivatsa on his breast (120).

In the twenty fourth Yuga, sending Viswāmitra before him and dividing
himself into four parts the mighty-armed Lord Isvara became celebrated
in the world as the king Dasaratha’s son Rāma. He had eyes like lotuses
and was effulgent like the sun (121-122). For extending his favour to
the world, for destroying the Rākshasas and increasing virtue the highly
illustrious Lord was thus born (123). The sages designate that king of
men as the body of the masters of Bhutas. Viswamitra instructed that
intelligent one in the use of various weapons for the destruction of the
enemies of the gods who were irrepressible even unto them and who put
obstacles in the sacrifices of the self-controlled ascetics. On their
behalf that high-souled (prince) the foremost of the strong killed the
two Rakshasas (Mārichi and Suvāhu) (124–126). Formerly in the sacrifice
of the high-souled Janaka, he, easily out of sport, snapped the bow of
Hara (127). Living in the forest for fourteen years in the company of
Lakshmana Rāghava, ever engaged in the well-being of all creatures and
conversant with all the forms of religion, carried on austerities for
fourteen years (128). The beautiful Sitā, well-known in the world used
to remain by his side always. She was the Lakshmi known before and
followed her husband (129). Living in Janasthāna he accomplished the
work of the gods. Rāghava practised these hard penances for fourteen
years. Lakshmana followed the foot-steps of Sita and remained there as
his servant (130). There were two Rākshasas, Virādha and Kavandha of
dreadful prowess. They became so by the imprecation of a Gandharva.
Discharging at them burning arrows effulgent like the fire, the rays of
the sun or lightning, strong as the thunder-bolt of Indra, and the
feathers whereof were made of gold Rāma killed them both (131-132). On
behalf of Sugriva the highly-powerful Rāma killed Bali in battle and
installed Sugriva on the throne (133). The gods, the Asuras, the
Rakshasas and the Pisacas were not capable of slaying Rāvana. He was
difficult of being vanquished by any in the battle-field. Rāvana, having
the hue of a collection of red collyrium, had millions of Rākshasas as
his guards. The three worlds were terrorized by him. He was invincible,
irrepressible, proud and powerful like a tiger. Even the celestials
could not look at him and he was elated with pride on account of the
boon. He, assisted by his ministers, killed in battle this highly
powerful and huge bodied Rāvana, the king of Rakshasas, resembling a
massive cloud, along with his army (134-137). In the days of yore, Rāma
killed Rāvana the son of Pulastya, with his brothers, sons, ministers
and army, who was a confirmed villain, committed a great iniquity and
was invincible in battle. Madhu’s son the great Asura Lavana, a heroic
Dānava, who was elated with pride on account of the boon (conferred on
him), was killed in battle in the forest of Madhu, by Rāma, who was an
expert in battle. Other Rākshasas were also slain by him (138-140).
Having performed these feats Rāma, the foremost of the pious, collected
continually materials for the celebration of ten horse sacrifices (141).
During Rāma’s regeme, not a single inauspicious sound was heard, hostile
winds did not blow and no body lost his property (142). No widows
bewailed, nobody met with misfortune and the whole world¹⁴² enjoyed
peace during Rāma’s rule (143). Creatures had no fear from the
obstruction of water and air and the aged people had not to perform the
obsequial rites of the boys (144). The Kshatriyas used to serve the
Brāhmanas, the Vaisyas used to follow the Kshatriyas, and the Sudras,
divested of pride, used to serve the three superior castes. The women
never disregarded their husbands, and the husbands never ill-treated
their wives. The whole world was in peace, and freed from robbers. Rāma
alone was the lord and protector of all (145–146). During Rāma’s rule
people lived for a thousand years and had a thousand sons and no
creature suffered from any disease (147). During Rama’s rule, the gods,
the Rishis and men assembled together in the world (148). Persons,
well-read in the Puranas who consider Rāma as the source of all truths,
have sung this hymn in honor of that intelligent one (149). "Ratha, the
king of Ayodhyā, had a green hue, black eyes, nectarine speech, a
shining face, arms extending up to the knees, a beautiful countenance
and leonine shoulders". He ruled for eleven thousand years. In the
kingdom of that high-souled king were continually heard the chanting of
the Rig, Yajush and Sama Vedas, the twang of bows and the utterances
"make gifts and eat" (150–152). The energetic and accomplished son of
Dasaratha, Rāma, shining in his own effulgence, surpassed even the sun
in his lustre (153). Having celebrated hundreds of holy sacrifices with
perfect and most excellent gifts the highly powerful Raghava left
Ayodhya and repaired to the celestial region (154). Having thus brought
about the destruction of Rāvana with all his kinsmen, the omniscient and
mighty-armed Rāma, the descendant of Ikshāku, returned to the region of
the celestials (155).

Vaishampāyana said;—In the Māthura Kalpa the high-souled Keshava, for
the behoof of mankind, went through this incarnation which I have been,
at present, describing (156). In this incarnation the powerful lord slew
Salwa, Mainda, Dwivida, Kansa, Aristha, Vrishabha, Keshi, the demoness
Putanā, the elephant Kuvalayapida, Chānura, Musthi and other demons in
human forms (157-158). By Him of wonderful deeds the thousand arms of
Vāna were chopped off. The Asura, Naraka and highly powerful Yavana were
slain by him, in battle (159). He carried away by force all the jewels
of the kings. And all the wicked kings of the earth were slain, by him
(160). After the expiration of the ninth incarnation of the Dwapara Yuga
included within the eighteenth Mahāyuga, the lord Vishnu, having sent
beforehand Jātukarna, took his birth as Veda-Vyasa¹⁴³ (161). The one
Veda was divided into four by that high-souled one. This Vyasa, the son
of Satyavati,¹⁴⁴ procreated the race of Bharatas (162).

O king these incarnations, of the Lord, undertaken for the behoof of
mankind, have been described. I shall now present an account of the
future incarnations (163). The Lord again, for the well-being of
mankind, will appear as Kalki in the house of a Brāhmana by name
Vishnuyashas in the village of Sambhala (164). After the expiration of
the tenth incarnation He will send Yajnavalka before Him and then engage
in a discussion with the followers of Buddhism, who believe in the
transcient science, who always praise the present and speak ill of the
sacrifices. After defeating them he will disappear at the confluence of
the Ganges and Yamuna with his followers. When all the families will be
ruined, when all the kings, with their ministers and soldiers will be
destroyed there will be none to look after the people. When they will
all be killed by internal dessensions and when their riches will be
pilfered by one another, they will begin to weep, being stricken with
grief. Thus assailed by misfortune at the end of the Kaliyuga all the
creatures will meet with destruction along with the Yuga itself
(165–168).

After the termination of the Kali Yuga the Satya Yuga will again appear
in due order. This is the outcome of the natural sequence and there can
no perversion of it (169). These and various other celestial
incarnations, consisting of gods, have been recorded in the Puranas by
the Rishis conversant with the knowledge of Brahman (170). I have only
given an outline of the incarnations of the Lord the preceptor of all
the worlds, by the chanting of which even the gods are charmed and in
which exist all the Srutis and Puranas (171-172). The ancestral manes of
the person are delighted who, with folded palms, listens to or recites
the incarnations of Vishnu of unlimited power. If a man listens to the
illusive sports of this Lord of Yoga he is freed from all his sins and
acquires, by the favour of the Lord, virtue, prosperity, ascetic wealth
and various objects of enjoyment (173-174).

¹²³ A food for gods.

¹²⁴ A priest.

¹²⁵ A kind of food.

¹²⁶ A winnowing basket.

¹²⁷ A wooden pestle used for cleaning rice.

¹²⁸ Offering of oblation.

¹²⁹ Members of a sacrifice.

¹³⁰ A house for the assembly of priests.

¹³¹ A ladle or spoon.

¹³² The room opposite to that which contains the materials for an
 oblation and in which the family and friends of the sacrificer
 assemble.

¹³³ A level square piece of ground made of bricks prepared for a
 sacrifice.

¹³⁴ The same as the previous footnote

¹³⁵ A portion of fire.

¹³⁶ Gayatri and other metrical verses.

¹³⁷ Fire

¹³⁸ A name of fire.

¹³⁹ A name of fire.

¹⁴⁰ A name of fire. Other words have been explained in previous notes.

¹⁴¹ This refers to His _Rajasik_ form or the form partaking of the
 quality of darkness.

¹⁴² By the word _world_ the author evidently means the whole of Rama’s
 dominion which extended over the entire northern and southern
 India and even the far-off Ceylon. It is frequently seen in
 Sanskrit works that the word _world_ is generally put for _whole
 of India_.

¹⁴³ The Vedas are the earliest work on our theology. According to the
 tradition they were coeval with creation which had itself taken
 place according to the laws of a pre-existing Veda. They were
 however scattered; some legends state they were lost; and it was
 not till after many years that a Rishi or sage arranged them and
 gave them the form in which they are known. These are Rik, Yajush,
 Saman and Atharvan. The Rig-Veda, from the radical rich to laud,
 is intended to be read on occasions when encomiastic prayers and
 hymns to the elemental deities are prescribed, by the law; the
 Yajush relates chiefly to oblations and sacrifices and contains
 prayers adapted for certain rites to be performed at the full and
 change of the moon and hymns and directions character to be
 recited with melody; and the Atharva Veda, which is considered to
 be of a late date, consists of various hymns and incantations, the
 greater part of which are intended for the destruction and
 perdition of enemies. This arrangement procured to the editor the
 name of Vyasa or arranger.

¹⁴⁴ Satyavati was the daughter of a Apsara in the form of a fish. She
 passed into the hands of a fisherman. A Rishi, Parasara by name,
 grew amorous on seeing her. He knew her and in time she gave birth
 to a son on an island in the Yamuna. This son is Vyasa. See
 Mahabharata, Adi Parva chapter LXIII.