TITLE: ACCOUNT OF RAIVATA AND HIS SONS

Janamejaya said:—O foremost of the twice-born, why were not Revati and
Revata’s son Kukudmi, visited by decrepitude although they lived for
many years (1). Why does Saryāti’s grandson, even after his retirement
to Meru, still live in this world? I wish to hear all this in sooth (2).

Vaishampāyana said:—O sinless one, O foremost of Bharatas, there is
neither decrepitude, hunger, thirst, death, nor the change of seasons in
the region of Brahmā (3). After the departure of Revata’s son Kukudmi,
his city Kushasthali was destroyed by demons and goblins (4). That
high-souled and pious king had a hundred brothers. When the Rākshasas
began to carry on the work of destruction they fled away in various
directions (5). O king of kings, when after their escape all the hundred
brothers settled in various parts the Kshatriyas thereof were stricken
with fear (6), O king, their families extended to all those countries
and are known as Sharyātas (7). O foremost of Bharatas, in all the
quarters those pious Kshatriyas reside; O descendant of Kurus, amongst
them many entered into mountainous regions (8). The two sons of
Nabhāgāristha, although born of a Vaishya mother, attained to the status
of a Brāhmana. The sons of Karusha, Kshatriyas dreadful in battle,
passed by the name of Kārushas (9). Only one son of Prāngshu is
mentioned by the name of Prajapati. O Janamejaya, having killed the cow
of his preceptor, Prishata is said to have come by the birth of a Sudra.
O fore most of Bhāratas, I have thus given an account of the nine sons
of Manu Vaivaswata (10–11). When Manu sneezed there came out from his
nostril a son by name Ikshāwku. He had a hundred sons who gave away
profuse gifts (12). The eldest of them Vikukshi, on account of his huge
abdomen, could not make a warrior and so that pious king reigned as the
lord of Ayodhya (13). He had fifty excellent sons headed by Sakuni. They
all reigned, O king, protecting the province of Uttarapatha (14). O
king, thirty-eight sons headed by Shashāda protected the southern
quarter (15). On an _Ashtaka_¹⁷ day Ikshwāku commanded Vikukshi by
saying "O you of great strength, do you bring meat for the Srāddha after
killing deer (16)." Having taken the meat of a hare before the
performance of the _Srāddha_ for which it was collected he returned from
hunting with the name of _Shashāda_¹⁸ (17). He was forsaken by Ikshwāku
at the words of Vashishtha. After the demise of Ikshwāku Shashāda began
to live in the city (of Ayodhya) (18). Shashāda’s son was the powerful
Kakutstha. Seated on the hump of Indra in the guise of a bull he
defeated the Asuras in the days of yore in battle and accordingly he was
called Kakutstha. Kakustha’s son was Anenā and his son was Prithu
(19–20). Prithu’s son was Vishtarāshwa and from him was born Adra.
Adra’s son was Yuvanāshwa and his son was Shrāva (21). The king Shrāva
made a city by the name of Shrāvasti. And his son was highly illustrious
Vrihadāshwa (22). His son was the highly pious king Kuvalashwa, who, by
killing (the demon) Dhundhu, came by the name of king Dhundhumāra (23).

Janamejaya said:—O Brahman, I wish to hear the true account of the
destruction of Dhundhu for which Kuvalashwa came by the name of
Dhundhumāra (24).

Vaishampāyana said:—Kuvalāshwa had a hundred sons all skillful archers;
they were all well-educated, powerful irrepressible and pious and
performed sacrifices and gave away profuse gifts. Kuvalāshwa installed
his son Vrihadāshwa in the kingdom (25–26). Having made over the charge
of his kingdom to his son he repaired to the forest. But the saint
Uttanka prevented him (from doing that) (27). He said:—"O king, it
behoves you to protect your subjects; you should not carry on penances,
relieved of all anxiety (for the state) (28). O king, high-souled as you
are, the earth should be protected by you. Setting aside all cares you
should not enter into woods (29). It is seen that great virtue consists
in protecting the subjects, but not so, in repairing to the forest (30)
Such is upheld to be the duty of a king and even the former saintly
kings used to protect their subjects. Therefore, you should look after
your subjects (31). On the even ground near my hermitage, all desert and
with little water, there is a tract full of the sands of the ocean
called _Ujjānaka_.¹⁹ There entered into the ground full of sand a
huge-bodied and highly powerful (demon) whom it was beyond (the power of
the) gods even to destroy. That son of the Rakshasa, Madhu, also passed
by the name of the huge Asura, Dhundhu. Resorting to dreadful penances,
he is lying there for the destruction of men (32-33). When he breathes
after the expiration of a year the earth trembles with her mountains,
forest and wood (34). The heavy dust, raised by his breath, obstructs
the path of the sun—the earth-quake continues for one week—and there
comes out smoke with scintillations of fire and cinders. At that time, O
my child, I cannot live at my hermitage (35-36). Therefore, for the
behoof of mankind, do you slay that huge-bodied demon. On the
destruction of that demon people will be at ease (37). O king, you alone
are competent to kill him. O sinless one, in the previous Yuga Vishnu
conferred a boon on me (38). ’You will welcome his energy with a boon
who will kill that dreadful and highly powerful great Asura’ (39). O
king, even in a hundred celestial years trifling energy cannot consume
that highly powerful Dhundhu. Great is his energy which even the gods
cannot with difficulty overcome (40)". Thus accosted by the high-souled
Uttanka the royal saint despatched his son Kuvalāshwa for suppressing
Dhundhu (41).

Vrihadashwa said:—"O Reverend Sir, I have given up the use of weapons.
He is my son, and forsooth, O foremost of the twice-born, he will
destroy Dhundhu (and acquire the name of Dhundhumāra) (42)".

Having ordered his son for the destruction of Dhundhu, the
self-controlled royal saint went to the mountain for carrying on
penances (43). O king, Kuvalāshwa, with his hundred sons and the
ascetic, issued out to destroy Dhundhu (44). For the behoof of mankind
and at the behest of Uttanka the Lord Divine Vishnu entered into him by
his own energy (45). After his departure a terrible sound was heard in
the sky. "This graceful prince will be _Dhundhamara_ (46)".²⁰ Then the
celestials engarlanded him with heavenly garlands. The celestial bugles
were also sounded, O foremost of Bharatas (47).

Having gone there, that best of victors, the energetic (Kuvalāshwa) made
his sons dig up the un-ending sandy ocean (48). O descendant of Kuru,
being invigorated by Nārāyana’s energy he became highly powerful and
energetic (49). Digging up the sandy ocean his sons, O king, found out
Dhundhu, lying in the west (50). He seemed, as if, to have burnt down
the quarters in anger with fire coming out of his mouth. O foremost of
Bharatas, as the ocean swells up with the rise of the moon, so (by the
movement of that demon) mighty torrents of water began to flow.
Excepting three the hundred sons of that king were consumed by that
Rākshasa (51–52). Thereupon, O descendant of Kuru, the highly energetic
king Dhundhumāra confronted the highly powerful Rākshasa Dhundhu (53).
Then having drunk up, by his Yoga power, his (Rakshasa’s) watery energy
the ascetic (king) quenched the fire with water (54). Then having slain
with his strength that demon of the water the king proved himself
successful to Uttanka (55). Uttanka too conferred a boon on the high
souled king—via endless riches, victory over his enemies, inclination to
virtue and eternal habitation in heaven, as well as the attainment to
the eternal region of those of his sons who were killed by the Rākshasa
(56–57).

¹⁷ The eighth day of three months on which the progenitors are
 worshipped.

¹⁸ Meaning one who eats the meat of a hare.

¹⁹ Literally _Ut_ and _Janaka_ or collection of men, i.e., divested
 of men. It means that in that tract of land there was no human
 habitation.

²⁰ Lit: Destroyer of (the Demon) Dhundhu. This will be his surname
 after the destruction of the demon Dhundhu by him.

CHAPTER. XII. THE STORY OF SATYAVRATA.

Vaishampāyana said:—Of his three surviving sons Dridhāshwa is spoken of
as the eldest; Chandrāshwa and Kapilāshwa were the two younger sons (1).
Haryashwa was the son of Dhundhumāra’s son Dridhāshwa. His son was
Nikumbhu always observant of the duties of the Kshatryas (2). Nikumbhu’s
son was Sanghatāshwa, well-versed in the art of warfare. O king,
Sanghatāshwa had two sons Krishāshwa and Akrishāshwa (3). Himalaya’s
daughter Drishadvati, respected by the good and celebrated in the three
worlds, was his spouse. Her son was Prasenajit (4) Prasenajit got a wife
by name Gouri ever devoted to her husband. Cursed by her husband she
became a river by name Vāhudā (5). His son was the emperor Yuvanāshwa
whose son was Māndhātā, the victor of the three worlds (6). His wife was
Chaitrarathi the daughter of Shashavindhu—her another name was the
chaste Vindumati unequalled in beauty in the world (7). She was chaste
and the eldest of ten million brothers. O king, Māndhātā begat on her
two sons—the pious Purukutsa and the virtuous Muchukunda. Purukutsa’s
son was the emperor Trāsadasyu (8–9). He begat a son on Narmadā by name
Sambhuta whose son was the king Sudhanwā (10). Sudhanwā’s son was
Tridhanwā, the represser of foes; the educated powerful king Trayyāruna
was Tridhanwā’s son (11). His highly powerful son, of vicious
understanding, by name Satyavrata, put obstacles to the nuptial mantras
(12). On account of his childishness, fickleness, lust, ignorance and
joy he took as his wife the duly wedded spouse of another man (13). Out
of lust he stole away the daughter of another citizen. Pierced by the
dart of iniquity and worked up with anger (therefore) the king
Trayyāruna renounced him saying. "Go to rack and ruin." Forsaken by his
sire he again and again said to him "Where shall I go?" (14–15).

The father then said to him "Go and live with the _Chandalas_.²¹ O you
who have sullied your family, I do not like to be the father of a son
like you (16)". Thus spoken to by his father he issued out of the city.
The omniscient Rishi Vasishtha did not prevent him (however) (17) O
child, thus forsaken by his father the heroic Satyavrata repaired to
where the _Chandalas_ were living. His father too left for the forest
(18). On account of his iniquity the chastiser of Pakā²² (Indra), did
not pour rain in his kingdom for twelve long years (19). Having made
over the kingdom to his wives the great ascetic Viswāmitra carried on
hard penances near the sea (20). Having tied a rope round the neck of
his own begotten second son his wife sold him for a hundred coins for
the maintenance of the remaining sons (21). O descendant of Bharata,
when he saw the ascetic’s son thus bound for sale the pious prince
released him (22). For encompassing Viswāmitra’s pleasure and for his
favour the mighty-armed Satyavrata maintained his sons (23). On account
of his being bound by the neck the great ascetic passed by the name of
Gālava. And that great saint Kausika was released by that heroic (king)
(24).

²¹ A low caste people, by living with whom the people are outcasted.

²² This refers to Indra the god of rain. He received this appellation
 by destroying a demon by name Paka.