TITLE: BIRTH OF KRISHNA AND BALADEVA

Vaishampayana said:—Under these arrangements the celestial-like Devaki
conceived for seven times as described before (1). Kansa killed the
_Sargarbhas_ by dashing them against a stone, as soon as they came out.
The embryo of the seventh conception was transferred to Rohini (2). Once
on a time at the dead of night while Rohini was sleeping a sound sleep
there took place a discharge of blood followed by an abortion (3).
Rohini, in a dream, saw the falling of her embryo and when she awoke, a
little after, she was greatly pained on not seeing it (4). In that dark
night Vasudeva’s wife Rohini, resembling the moon, was worked up with
great anxiety; thereat the goddess of sleep said to her (5). "O fair
one, I have extracted the embryo out of Devaki’s womb and placed it in
yours. Therefore this your son will be celebrated by the name of
Sangkarshana" (6). Obtaining that son she was pleased and with her head
down she entered her own house like the beautiful wife of the moon (7).

When people grew anxious of instituting enquiries about the seventh
conception of Devaki she conceived him for the eighth time for whom
Kansa had killed her seven children (8). Kansa’s servants began to watch
it with great care wherein the Lord Hari was living of his own accord
(9). Yashodā too conceived the goddess of sleep, begotten of a portion
of Vishnu’s energy and intent on carrying out his command (10). Before
the period of conception was complete, in the eighth month both Devaki
and Yashodā simultaneously gave birth to their children (11). In the
same night in which Krishna was born in the race of Vrishnis, Yashodā
gave birth to her daughter (12). Vasudeva’s wife Devaki and Nanda’s wife
Yashoda, both of them, conceived at the same time (13). In the
auspicious midnight and in _Abkijit Muhurtta_, Devaki gave birth to
Vishnu and Yashodā to that daughter (14). When Janārddana was born, the
oceans were agitated, the pillars of the earth were shaken, the fires,
that had been extinguished, began to burn, auspicious winds began to
blow, the dust was removed and the luminous bodies manifested themselves
(15–16). When the invisible, eternal and powerful Lord Hari of subtle
soul, who encompasses the well-being of the world, was born, the night
was Jayanti, the _Nakshatra_ was Abhijit and Muhurtta was Vijaya. As
soon as he was born he overpowered all the worlds with his looks. The
celestial bugles began to produce sound without being struck and the
king of gods showered flowers from the etherial region. The great
saints, accompanied by the Gandharvas and Apsaras, chanted the glories
of the slayer of Madhu in auspicious hymns. When Hrishikesha was born
the whole universe was in an ecstacy of joy (17–20). Indra too, along
with the gods, eulogised the glories of Madhusudhana. Seeing, in that
night, Vishnu²⁰² born as his son, bearing the mystic mark of Srivasta
and other signs of divinity Vasudeva said to him, "O lord, do thou
withdraw this form of thine. O thou having lotus-eyes, I have been
greatly terrified, on account of my sons, your elder brothers, being
slain by Kansa and therefore I speak thus" (21–23).

Vaishampayana said:—Hearing the words of Vasudeva the lord withdrew his
form of four arms and addressing him as his father asked him to take him
to the house of the milkman Nanda (24). Taking that boy, Vasudeva too,
fond of his sons, speedily repaired to the house of Yashodā (25).
Placing his son in her house against her knowledge he brought her
daughter and placed her on Devaki’s bedstead (26).

After the children had been exchanged Anakadundhubi Vasudeva, having
accomplished his work and his mind filled with fear, issued out of his
house and communicated to Ugrasena’s son Kansa the birth of a beautiful
daughter (27-28). Hearing it the powerful Kansa quickly arrived at
Vasudeva’s door and enquired of him about what was born. He then ordered
him to hand over the new born babe, and remonstrated with him severely
(26-30).

Hearing this all the women of Devaki’s family cried aloud and she,
herself shedding tears, prayed humbly to him; "O lord, you have already
killed my seven beautiful sons. I have taken this new-born daughter for
already slain. Do what you think proper." Seeing that girl and drawing
her out the wicked-minded Kansa said:—"While a daughter is born she is
already killed." That girl, equal to the earth herself, who was wearied
on account of her living in the womb and whose hairs were wet with the
water thereof, was placed before him on the ground. Taking her with
contempt by the legs and whirling her Kansa dashed her against a stone.
Although thrown on a rock in derision, that girl, who is daily
worshipped by the gods, was not crushed. On the other hand, casting off
her human from and being adorned with celestial garlands, pastes, and a
shining crown she, with dishevelled hairs and remonstrating with Kansa,
rose up in the sky (31–38). She was clad in a dark blue raiment, her
breasts were rising, her hip was spacious like a car and she had four
arms. Her colour was shining like lightning, her eyes were like the
rising sun, and she was like a clouded evening. That dreadful girl,
having a moon-like countenance, and roaring like a cloud, was surrounded
by ghosts and goblins. Dancing and laughing in that dark night she rose
up in the sky. Drinking most excellent wine and laughing aloud she, in
anger, said to Kansa (39–42).

"O Kansa, for thy own destruction thou hast whirled and dashed me
against a rock. Therefore at the time of thy death when thy enemy will
attack thee I will tear off thy body with my hands and drink thy hot
blood" (43-44).

Giving vent to these dreadful words, the goddess, by her own wished-for
way, rose up in the sky; and encircled by her own followers and in that
form she began to range in the celestial region (45). That girl,
worshipped by Vrishnis, grew up there. By the command of their kings the
gods brought her up like a child (46). That daughter, who was formerly
created by Brahmā through his yoga, was born with the Lord for
protecting Keshava (47). The Yādāvas daily worship her, who in her
celestial form, protected Krishna (48). After her departure Kansa took
her for the instrument of his death. And being ashamed he secretly said
to Devaki (49).

Kansa said:—"O Sister, I have made endless attempts to escape the hand
of death, and for this, I have destroyed many of your children. O Madam,
my death has now come from another quarter (50). Alas! being ruthless, I
have, with care, slain my own kinsmen, but have not been able to
supersede destiny by my manliness (51). Under the influence of bad time,
I have been the instrument of their death. Therefore cast off your
anxiety for the destruction of your embryos and your sorrow for the
death of your sons (52). It is Time that is the enemy of all and brings
about their destruction. It is Time that moves every thing. People, like
me, are merely the instruments (53). O lady, calamities, the inevitable
out-come of one’s own deeds, arrive of them selves in proper time. But
pity it is that (they think) ’I am the doer’ (54). Do not lament for
your sons and renounce your grief. Such is the course of men and no body
can undo the work of Time (55). The mischiefs, that I have done to you,
are all present in my mind. I throw myself at your feet like a son. Be
not offended with me" (56).

After Kansa had said this, the poor Devaki, with her face bathed in
tears, and casting her looks upon her husband said—"Rise up, my brother,
rise up." And then she addressed to him the following (57).

Devaki said:—"Being like the veritable Death, you have killed, before my
very eyes, all my children. You are not to blame for this. Death himself
is the instrument hereof (58). I forgive you for the sin that you have
committed by destroying my children, since, touching my feet with your
head you are repenting for your mis-deeds (59). Death, in old age and
while in the womb, is however inevitable. And it is equally difficult to
escape its hand even in boyhood and youth (60). This is all the work of
Time; you are merely an instrument. One, who is not born, is not to be
seen like air. One, who being born attains to the condition of one not
born is to be considered as such.²⁰³ All this is the work of Providence.
Death first carries away all and next the instrument is pointed out.
Therefore, go, my child, you are not the cause of my children’s death.
On account of various rites,²⁰⁴ pristine actions, the time of creation,
the works of parents, people meet with death."

Hearing the words of Devaki, Kansa, worked up with anger and his heart
consuming, entered his own house. His object being baffled he went there
depressed and absent-minded (61–65).

²⁰² The word in the text is _Adhokshaja_, a name of Vishnu. It
 literally means, being produced by or produced to such as have
 subdued or cast down their passions.

²⁰³ As no love is cherished for a son who is not born so no attachment
 should be felt for him, who is dead as soon as he is born.

²⁰⁴ The various rites that are performed beginning with the birth of a
 child.