TITLE: AN ACCOUNT OF SAGARA

Janamejaya said:—Why was the powerful king Sagara born with poison? And
why did he, worked up with anger, put down the religious practices of
Shakas and other highly powerful Kshatriya clans as laid down by their
respective orders. And why was he not injured by poison? Describe all
this at length, O great ascetic (1-2).

Vaishampāyana said:—O king, when Vāhu grew addicted to vice, Haihaya,
with Tālajānghas and Shakas spoliated his territories (3). Yavanas,
Pāradas, Kāmbhojas, Palhavas and Shakas—these five classes (of Mlechhas)
displayed their prowess for Haihaya (4). Deprived of his kingdom, the
king Vāhu retired into a forest life. Followed by his wife he gave up
his life there in great misery (5). His wife of the Yadu race was (at
that time) enciente and she followed her husband whose other wife had
administered poison unto her before (her departure) (6). When she,
making a funeral pyre for her husband in that forest, got upon it Aurva,
born in the family of Bhrigu, out of compassion, prevented her (7). In
his hermitage she gave birth to the highly powerful and mighty-armed
king Sagara together with poison (8). Having performed all the rites
consequent upon the birth of that high-souled (king) Aurva taught him
the Vedas and then gave him at last the fiery weapon which even the
immortals cannot withstand. Gifted with great strength he, by dint of
the prowess of that weapon, in no time destroyed the Haihayas like unto
enraged Rudra slaying the beasts. That foremost of the illustrious
(kings) spread his own fame in the world (9-11). Thereupon he made up
his mind for extirpating the race of the Shakas, Kāmbhojas and Palhavas
(12). When about to be slain by the high-souled hero, they, seeking
refuge with the intelligent Vasishtha, bowed unto him (13). Seeing them
arrived in proper time the highly effulgent Vasishtha promised them
security and prevented Sagara (14). Considering his own promise and the
words of his preceptor Sagara violated their religious practices and
made them change their dress (15). Having made the Shakas shave half of
their heads he dismissed them. He made the Yavanas and Kāmbhojas shave
their entire head (16). Pāradas used to have their hairs dishevelled and
Palhavas kept beards. They were prohibited from studying the Vedas, and
offering oblation to fire by the high-souled (Sagara) (17). O my child,
Shakas, Yavanas, Kāmbhojas, Paradas, Kolasapyas, Mahishas, Dārvas,
Cholas and Keralas were all Kshatriyas. O king, at the words of
Vasishtha their religious practices were put down by the high-souled
Sagara (18-19). Having conquered the entire earth consisting of (the
provinces of) Khasa, Tukhāra, China, Madra, Kishkindhaka, Kountala,
Banga, Shālwa, Konkashaka and others, that king, who had put down other
religious forms, entered upon the performance of Bājapeya sacrifice and
let loose a horse (20–21). The horse, while it was roaming near the bank
of the south eastern ocean, was pilfered and made to enter into the
earth (22). Then the king had that portion of the country dug by his
sons. When that mighty ocean was thus dug up they arrived at a place
where the prime deity, the Patriarch Hari, the best of male beings, in
the shape of Kapila, was sleeping (23–24). O great king, when he awoke
all the sons (of Sagara), with the exception of four, were all consumed
by the fire coming out of his eyes (25). O king, they were Varhaketu,
Suketu, Dharmarātha and the heroic Panchajana—they perpetuated the race
of Sagara (36). The Omniscient Hari Nārāyana conferred on him many boons
viz.—unending family, the eternal glory of the Ikshwāku family, the
birth of the ocean as his son, eternal habitation in heaven, and the
ascension into the eternal region of those of his sons who had been
consumed by the fiery looks of Kapila (27–28). Thereupon the ocean
worshipped that king with Arghya, and for this it obtained the
appellation of Sāgara (29). He obtained from the ocean that horse
destined for the Aswamedha sacrifice (30). The highly illustrious king
performed a hundred horse sacrifices and we have heard that he had sixty
thousand sons (31).