TITLE: THE DEFEAT OF THE ASURA NARAKA

Janamejaya said:—O great Muni, describe to me what the powerful Vishnu
did when he came over to Dwārāka after the destruction of Rukshmi (1).

Vaishampāyana said:—The beautiful and powerful lord Vishnu, having lotus
eyes, the enhancer of the delight of the Yadavas, encircled by them,
directed his mind towards Dwārakā (2) The diverse riches and jewels, he
could lay his hands on any where, he made the Rākshasas bring over to
his own house. The great Asuras, Dānavas and Daityas, who had acquired
boons, as also put in many obstacles at that time; but the mighty-armed
Mādhava destroyed them all (3–4).

O king, while Mādhava lived in Dwarakā, the Dānava Naraka, the great
enemy of the king of gods and a terror to the celestials, presented many
obstacles in his way (5). That Dānava, residing at Murtilinga, an
oppresser of all the gods, used always to oppose the celestials and the
Rishis (6). Once on a time Bhumi’s son Naraka, the king of Prāgyotish,
went to a place called Kasheru. There assuming the form of an elephant
he, by force, ravished Twastha’s daughter the beautiful Chaturdashi. And
shorn of fear or sorrow he foolishly said:—"From this very day, the
Rākshasas, Daityas and Dānavas will bring for me all the jems the gods
and men possess, all that the entire earth contains and all that lie in
the ocean." Saying this Bhumi’s son began to pilfer diverse riches and
clothes. But he did not enjoy them (7–11). The powerful Naraka carried
all the maidens of the gods, Gandharvas, men and the seven divisions of
the Apsaras (12). Thus sixteen thousand and one hundred chaste maidens,
wearing a single braid of hairs, were brought (13). The powerful Bhouma
made a house for them on the mount Mani in Alakā near the territory of
the Daitya Maru (14). There the ten daughters of Maru, those maidens and
the other leading Rākshasas used to carry out his command and adore him,
the king of Pragyotish. O king, the great Asura Naraka, who had obtained
a boon, lived on the bank of the blue ocean (15). Even all the Asuras,
collected together, could not perform before the dreadful feat which
this great demon did (16). O Janamejaya, for ear-rings the great demon
Naraka, whom the goddess earth gave birth to and whose capital was
Prāgyotish, oppressed even Aditi (17). He had four gate-keepers,
dreadful in battle, namely Hayagriva, Nisunda, Panchanada and the great
Asura Muru with his thousand sons, proud of his boon. Those warders,
terrors to those who perform pious deeds, used to occupy even the
aethireal way along with the Rākshasas in battle (18–19).

For his destruction. Vasudeva, of the Vishni race, begat the might-armed
Janārddana, holding conch, discus, club and sword, on Devaki. After
holding consultation with one another the celestials selected the city
of Dwārakā for the residence of the great Purusha Mādhava, of well-known
prowess on earth (20–21). Encircled by the great ocean and beautified
with five hills, that city of Dwārakā excelled that of Indra even in
beauty (22). The great assembly-hall in that city, resembling that of
gods, which extended over a _yojana_ and had huge golden door-ways, was
celebrated by the name of Dāshārha; and the leading members of the
Vrishni and Andhaka races, headed by Rāma and Krishna, used to carry on
their daily transactions there (23–24).

O foremost of Bharatas, once on a time while the Yādavas sat in that
hall there blew the wind carrying celestial fragrance and there was a
downpour of flowers (25). In a moment a great noise, covered with a net
of lustre, was heard in the sky. Within that effulgence, Vāsava was
seen, seated on a white elephant and encircled by the gods (26–27).
Rāma, Krishna and the king Ugrasena, with other leading Yādavas went out
and welcomed the king of gods (28). Afterwards coming down speedily from
that elephant chief the king of gods embraced Janārddana, Baladeva, the
king Ahuka and then the other Yādavas, in order of age and rank. And
then adored by Rāma and Krishna he entered into that magnificent
assembly-hall. Seated there and adoring it the king of gods duly
accepted _arghya_ and other articles of hospitality (29–31).

Then touching the auspicious countenance of his younger brother
(Krishna) with his hand the highly powerful Vāsudava addressed to him
the following consoling words (32). "O Devaki’s son, O slayer of Madhu
and of thy enemies, hear for what I have come to thee (33). Elated with
the boon conferred on him by Brahmā the great Asura Naraka has foolishly
stolen the ear-rings of Aditi (34). He always acts against the gods and
Brāhmanas and is on the look out for your loopholes. Do thou therefore
kill that sinful wretch (35). This Vinatā’s son Guruda, highly powerful,
capable of ranging anywhere and of assuming any strength and always
moving in the sky, will take thee there (36). O Upendra, Bhumi’s son,
Naraka, is unslayable by all creatures. Do thou soon kill that sinful
one and come back (37)."

Thus addressed by the king of gods, the mighty-armed and lotus-eyed
Keshava promised to kill Naraka (38). Then taking up his conch, discus,
club and sword, he, along with Satyabhāmā, sat on Garuda’s back and
immediately started with Sakra (39). Before the very eyes of the leading
Yadus, Keshava, assisted by the powerful Garuda, crossed the seven
regions of the wind-gods and rose high up (40). Then on account of the
distance the king of gods, seated on the elephant chief and Janārddana,
seated on Garuda, appeared like the sun and the moon (41). Thereupon the
Gandharvas and Apsaras chanting their glories in the sky they gradually
disappeared (42). Then advising as to what he should do Vāsava, the king
of gods, repaired to his own abode and Krishna went to the city of
Prāgyotish (43). At that time struck by the flapping of Garuda’s wings
the wind blew in a contrary direction and the sky rangers were assailed
by clouds of dreadful sound (44). By the help of that sky-ranging bird
Mādhava, in no time, reached his wished-for quarter, and seeing the
gate-keepers from distance he went where they were (45). Arriving at the
gate of the mount Mani he saw there elephants, horses, car-warriors and
six-thousand nooses sharp like razors (16).

Vaishampāyana said:—Then beholding the beautiful, four-armed Krishna,
holding conch, discus, club and sword, wearing a garland of wild flowers
round his neck, bearing the moon-like mystic mark Srivatsa on his
breast, with his head illumined with a crown effulgent like the sun or
moon accompanied by a lightning, looking like a blue ocean, and clad in
a yellow raiment, and hearing the dreadful twang of of his bow
resembling the fall of a thunder-bolt the Dānavas could understand that
Vishnu himself had come (47-49). Taking up his Sakti, adorned with
diamond and gold, the great Asura Muru, resembling Death himself, ran
toward him and hurled that huge weapon at him. Beholding that Sati, like
unto a burning fire-brand about to fall Vasudeva took up gold feathered
arrows. When the powerful Vāsudeva discharged that arrow burning like a
lightning it cut that Sakti into twain. When that Sakti was sundered
Muru, having his eyes reddened in anger, took up a huge club and
discharged it as the king of gods hurls his thunder-bolt. Having drawn
his crescent-shaped weapon to his ears Keshava, the foremost of gods,
cut off with it, in the middle the golden club. And with a Bhalla he cut
off the Dānava’s head (50-55).

Having thus slain Muru with his friends and cut off his nooses the Lord,
Devaki’s son, killed the highly powerful Rākshasa soldiers of Naraka.
And crossing the mountain he saw the Dānava host consisting of Nisunda,
Diti’s son Hayagriva and the other heroes capable of fighting in many
ways. Thereupon speedily getting upon his chariot and putting on a
strong celestial golden armour, the highly powerful Nisunda, with his
arms, obstructed Keshava’s path. Thereupon he pierced the slayer of
Keshi and Madhu with ten arrows who in return wounded him with seventy
winged shafts and cut off the Dānāvā’s arrow in the sky before they
could approach him. Then his army completely surrounded Keshava.
Although covered with the net-work of this arrows Janārddana, the
foremost of gods, was highly enraged at seeing those Dānavas and
withstood the Dāvnava army with a downpour of cloudy weapons and other
arrows (56-63). Thereupon assailing all of them with five arrows each he
pierced them to the very vitals with cloudy weapons. Filled with fear
the Dānava army fled away from the battle-field. Beholding his army thus
flying away he again came to the battle (64–65). And making a downpour
of arrows he covered Keshava. Neither the sun, the sky nor the ten
quarters were visible (66). Thereupon taking up a divine weapon, by name
Sāvitra, Hari, the foremost of Purushas, cut off his arrows in the
battle-field. Cutting off the arrows of the Dānavas with his own the
highly powerful Krishna sundered his umbrella with one arrow and the
pole of his car with three. And again destroying his four horses with
four arrows he killed his charioteer with five and cut off his standard
with one. Afterwards with a highly sharpened and whetted Bhalla,
Krishna, the foremost of gods, cut off Nisunda’s head who, alone, in the
days of yore, had fought with the gods for a thousand years (66–71).

Beholding Nisunda thus slain the foremost of Asuras, Hayagriva,
effulgent like a mountain, took up a huge rock and vauntingly hurled it
with great force. Thereupon taking up his celestial cloudy weapon and
discharging it Vishnu, the foremost of those conversant with the use of
weapons, sundered the rock into seven and the stones fell down on earth.
O foremost of Bharatas, with huge arrows of diverse colors discharged
off the Sranga bow there set in a dreadful battle, abounding in various
weapons like that between the gods and demons. Thus seated on Garuda the
mighty-armed Janārddana began to destroy the demons; what more, all the
Dānavas, who approached Nārāyana, were wounded with the huge ploughshare
and killed with arrows and swords. Some, consumed by the fire of the
discus, fell down from the sky, and some, coming near, gave up their
ghost with grim-visaged countenance. And although mutilated with the
arrows of Krishna, some Asuras, capable of fighting in many ways, began
to make a downpour of arrows like unto clouds discharging their watery
contents. Their persons were besmeared with blood like blossoming
Kisgsuka trees and they, with their weapons broken and filled with
fright, took to their heels (77–80). Thereupon with his eyes red hot in
anger the Dānava Hayagriva again, with velocity of the wind, drew a tree
ten fathoms high (81). Uprooting speedily that tree, the cloud-colored
Hayagriva ran and hurled it with such a force by virtue of his training,
that the huge sound, caused by the tree passing through air, was heard
by every body. With a thousand arrows, Janārddana speedily and
wonderfully cut that tree into many pieces and with one shaft struck
Hayagriva on the breast. That arrow, burning like fire, with great force
entered into the breast of the Dānava and came out piercing his very
vitals (82–85). The dreadful Janārddana, of unlimited prowess, the
enhancer of the delight of the Yādavas, killed that highly powerful and
irrepressible Hayagriva who alone formerly fought with the gods for one
thousand years. Having thus slain the grim-visaged and the iniquitous
Hayagriva in the province of Lohitanga in a city encircled by walls and
killed eight hundred thousand Dānavas Devaki’s son, the Lord, the
foremost of Pursushas and the slayer of his enemie’s, set out for the
city of Pragyotish (86–87).

Having entered the shining city of Prāgyotish, the highly powerful
Keshava, after many encounters, killed Naraka’s follower, the great
Asura Panchajana, and blew his conch Pānchjanya. That blare, grave as
the muttering of clouds and that of the whirlpool, was heard every where
all over the three worlds. Hearing that sound the eyes of the heroic
Naraka were reddened with anger. And getting upon his celestial car he
shone like the evening sun. It had eight iron wheels, was colored in
gold and red paints, had spacious seats, had golden flags and pennons
with golden standards. It had a pole set with diamonds and pearls, was
drawn by a thousand horses, was covered with an iron net work, was
filled with various weapons and made of gold. At that time Naraka’s face
looked effulgent like a fire-brand. And he appeared highly beautiful
with his white, and moon-like breast plate. On his head shone a crown of
sun-like lustre and his ears were shining with a pair of Kundalas
(88–96). Putting on diverse sorts of armours, the tawny-coloured,
grim-visaged and huge-bodied Daity as Dānavas, and Rākshasas issued out;
of them some had swords and shields, some had arrows and quivers, some
had Saktis and some had lances. Those well-armed heroes, expert in
fighting, rode elephants and horses and issued out of the city shaking
the earth. Encircled by Daityas Naraka, like unto Death him self, while
proceeding, heard on all sides the sound of thousands of bugles, conchs,
Mridangas and trumpets resembling the muttering of clouds (91-100).

Those grim-visaged heroes unitedly went, where Krishna was waiting and
began to fight with him. Those soldiers covered Vāsudeva with a
down-pour of arrows (101-102). Discharging thousands of Saktis, maces,
lances and arrows they covered the welkin (103). Moving his Srānga bow,
the twang whereof was like the muttering of a cloud, hither and thither,
Janārddana, looking like a dark-blue cloud, began to make a down-pour of
arrows on the Dānavas. And with it their highly powerful soldiers were
greatly assailed. Thus there took place a dreadful encounter between him
and the fierce-looking Rakshasas; and wounded by Krishna’s arrows the
Dānavas were routed (104-106). Some of the Dānavas had their arms broken
and some were wounded on the head and neck; some were cut in twain by
the discus and some were wounded on the breast with arrows (107). Of the
car-warriors, elephant-riders and cavalry some were cut into two pieces
and some were wounded with arrows and lances (108). Thus the entire
army, consisting of elephants, horses, and cars, was completely crushed
down. There took place a highly dreadful encounter in that battle
between him and Naraka (109). Listen to it, I shall describe it briefly.
The energetic Naraka, the terror of gods, fought with the foremost of
Purushas, Madhusudana, like Madhu himself. When in that battle, the
heroic Naraka, like unto Death himself, took up with reddened eyes, a
huge bow resembling that of Sakra, Keshava, taking up an arrow like the
fierce ray of the sun, filled his car with celestial weapons. Thereupon
when taking up a huge weapon the powerful Naraka was about to withstand
the great and war-like slayer of Madhu Janārddana, having a countenance
effulgent like lightning, he cut off that weapon with his discus and
sent his charioteer to the abode of Death with one arrow. Then
destroying the car with horses and standards with ten arrows the slayer
of Madhu cut his coat of mail with one arrow. Thereupon having his
horses slain, and stripped of his coat of mail like a serpent shorn of
its skin, the heroic Dānava Naraka, all on a sudden, took up a strong
iron dart effulgent like a lightning and sent it down whirling. Seeing
that dart covered with gold, about to fall down, Krishna, of wonderful
deeds, cut it off into two pieces with his razor-shaped weapon. Thus
there went on a dreadful encounter with that highly powerful and
grim-visaged Rākshasa Naraka, abounding in most excellent weapons.
Fighting with Naraka for a moment the dreadful Janārddana cut him into
two pieces with his effulgent discus. His body, sundered into twain with
the discus, fell on earth like a mountain summit clapped by a
thunder-bolt. It appeared that the sun was enshrouded by Krishna-like
black clouds (110—122). Naraka’s head, cut off by the discus, appeared
on the battle-field like unto a mountain of minerals clapped by a
thunderbolt (123). Beholding his son slain, Bhumi came with the pair of
Kundalas to Govinda and said "O Govinda, thou dost sport as a boy plays
with his toys. Thou hast with thy own hand killed him whom thou didst
give. O Lord, however, do thou accept these Kundalas for which thou hast
slain Naraka, and protect his children (124-126)".