TITLE: KRISHNA VISIT WITH ADITI

Vaishampāyana said:—Having slain Bhumi’s son Naraka powerful like
Vāsava, Vishnu, the younger brother of Indra began to search his house
(1). Having arrived at the Treasury of Naraka, Janārddana saw there,
diamonds, pearls, corals, sapphires, emeralds, and various other jems,
gold, heaps of jewels and other precious articles, a highly costly bed
shining like the moon, a lion-shaped throne effulgent like burning fire,
and a huge and beautiful umbrella of the hue of the clouds of the rainy
season, of the lustre of the moon and with a golden standard. O
Janamejaya, I have heard that there was also the golden fountain of
hundreds and thousands of streams, which he had brought from Varuna;
what more, we had never seen or heard of even in the palaces of Kuvera,
Yama and Indra, the collection of jewels that was in Naraka’s treasury.
Bhumi’s son Naraka, Nisunda and Hayagriva being slain, the surving
warders of his Treasury took to Keshava those costly jems and the
damsels of the seraglio, considering them as worthy of him (2-10).

The Daityas said:—O Janārddana, all these various jems and riches, these
goods made of corals, these beautiful flags set with golden threads,
these twenty thousand grim-visaged elephants carrying bows, _Tomaras_
and other weapons such-like forty-thousand she-elephants, and eight lacs
of horses of most excellent breed have been brought to thee. And we will
take to the houses of the Andhakas and Vrishnis as many kine as thou
shalt desire to have. O Lord, we will despatch to the houses of the
Yādavas, bed-steads of fine workmanship, seals, beautiful birds, sandal
and Aguru woods and other jems both in mountains or collected from the
three worlds that are in Naraka’s palace. There are now in Naraka’s
houses all the riches and jems that were formerly in the possession of
the gods, Gandharvas and Pannagas (11-17).

Vaishampāyana said:—Having accepted all those jewels and examined them,
Hrishikesha, the slayer of Madhu, sent them all speedily to Dwāravati
through the Danavas (18). Taking himself the Varuni umbrella capable of
showering gold, he rode Garuda that foremost of birds, the very
personification of a cloud, and set out for the foremost of mountains
Mani (19–20). Janārddana saw there on the mount Mani, gates, summits of
sapphire decorated with flags and doors. At that time adorned with rows
of palaces painted in golden colours, the entire mount Mani shone like a
cloud adorned with lightings. Madhusudana saw there the pure,
gold-coloured and plump-hipped daughters of the Gandharvas and leading
Asuras whom Naraka had carried away by force and confined there.
Although deprived of all sorts of enjoyments, still residing there as if
in the city of the celestials, they lived happily like celestial
damsels. And nobody, on account of Naraka’s powers, could take them away
(21-26.)

In order to behold the large-armed Krishna, the foremost of Yadus, the
damsels, controlling their senses, emaciated on account of the
observance of vows and fastings, clad in silken raiments and with one
braid of hairs approached Janarddana with folded hands and stood
encircling him. They fearlessly surrounded Krishna because they had
learnt of the death of the great Asuras Naraka, Mura, Hayagriva and
Nisunda. The elderly Mānavas who were their guards, although more aged,
bowed to Krishna, the descendant of Yadu, with folded hands. Beholding
the moon-like countenance of the large-armed Krishna, those beautiful
damsels were all worked up with desire and wished to select him as their
husband. And they accordingly with joyous hearts said:—(27–32). "What
the celestial saint Nārada, knowing the hearts of all creatures, and the
Wind-god had said to us before, is all true. They said that the
Universal Lord Nārāyana, the holder of conch, discus and club, slaying
Bhumi’s son Naraka, would in no time become our husband. We behold now
our beloved lord, the slayer of his enemies of whom we have been hearing
for ever. Oh! we have been blessed to-day by seeing this high-souled
deity" (33–35).

Thereupon having delightedly welcomed those lotus eyed damsels Vāsav’s
younger brother consoled them all. Having welcomed those ladies duly the
lotus-eyed Keshava, the slayer of Madhu took them all to Dwāraka in a
car protected by servants (36–37). Then there arose a great tumult of
the Rākshas quick-coursing like air, while carrying the vehicle.
Uprooting the most charming and brilliant summit of that best of
mountains, Vishnu the foremost of the strong rode that best of birds
Garuda. It was like the clear sun and the moon, had gates made of jewels
and gold, abounded in birds, deer, various animals and elephants, was
beautified with trees and filled with monkeys. It had spacious rocks,
boars, buffaloes and antelopes. Its table-land was filled with springs
and it had various sorts of trees. Many beasts and peacocks were roving
there and it was wonderful above all comprehension (38–43). Garuda the
king of birds easily carried Janarddana with his wife and the mount Meru
(44). With the flapping of his strong wings, that king of birds, huge
like a big mountain summit, raised up a tumultuous sound on all sides
(45). By the weight of his feet the mountain tops were all broken down,
the trees were uprooted, huge clouds were dispersed and some of them
assumed a wonderful form (46). In this way, as desired by Janarddana
that bird, fleet like the wind, went beyond the paths of the sun and the
moon (47). O Emperor, O thou the slayer of thy enemies, gradually
Keshava, the destroyer of his foes, arrived at the mount Sumeru and saw
the abodes of the celestials. And then crossing the shining babitations
of the Viswadevas, Sadhyas, Maruts, the two Aswins and other auspicious
regions, he arrived at the land of gods, and entered into the palace of
their king. Coming down from Garuda’s back, Madhava there met the king
of gods. And Indra too welcomed him with great delight. Giving to the
king of gods the pair of ear-rings belonging to Aditi and saluting him,
Janarddana, the foremost of men, along with his wife, was welcomed by
him in return. Puloma’s daughter duly received Satyabhāmā (48-53).

Thereupon Vasava and Vasudeva together with their wives repaired to the
prosperous abode of Aditi, the mother of celestials. Arriving there,
those two great gods saw the Asuras, seated all around worshipping the
great Aditi engaged in Tapas (54-55). Placing Janārddana before him,
Aditi’s son and Sachi’s lord Purandara approached his mother, saluted
her, gave her over the pair of ear-rings and narrated the glorious deeds
of Keshava. Hearing them, Aditi was pleased and took up her two sons on
her lap. And welcoming them with auspicious blessings, she honoured
them. Thereafter Puloma’s daughter and Satyabhama with great delight
saluted the feet of the goddess Aditi with veneration; welcoming them
duly with affection, the illustrious mother of the gods said to
Keshava:—"My son, as this king of gods is worshipful to all the worlds,
so you are unslayable by all creatures. This most excellent of all your
wives, this beautiful and pleasant looking Satyabhāma celebrated in all
the worlds, will be ever youthful and lucky. And from her person she
will emit charming and celestial fragrance. O Krishna, as long as you
will be in your human form, this your wife will not be visited by
decrepitude."

Thus honored by the mother of gods, the highly powerful Krishna was
honored by Vāsava with various jewels. Thereupon obtaining the
permission of the king of gods, riding Vinata’s son with Satyabhamā and
worshipped by the entire host of the celestials, he began to range in
the celestial gardens. While crossing the garden of Vasava the
mighty-armed Keshava saw the most excellent, sacred and celestial huge
tree Pārijata always emitting holy fragrance and daily blossoming,
approaching which every one regains the recollection of his pristine
birth. Although gods were kept there in charge of the tree, Krishna of
unlimited powers, forcibly up-rooted it and placed it on Garuda’s head.
Thereupon viewing the Apsaras, Upendra and Satyabhāma proceeded towards
Dwarka by the ethereal way. The celestial damsels from behind saw
Satyabhāma (56-69). Hearing of this deed of Krishna the mighty-armed
king of gods did not express his disapproval but rather said "Krishna is
never successful" (70). Thus adored by the celestials and hymned by the
seven saints, the mighty-armed Krishna the slayer of his enemies, set
out for Dwarka from the celestial region (71). Wending the long distance
like a short one, he espied the city of the Yadavas. Having performed
that great feat Vāsava’s younger brother the Lord Krishna, riding
Garuda, returned to Dwāraka (72-73).