TITLE: KRISHNA SUBDUES KALYA

Vaishampayana said:—Thinking thus Krishna repaired to the bank of the
river. Tying his cloth firmly he, with delight, got upon the Kadamba
tree (1). Climbing up to the top of the tree and emitting a leonine roar
the cloud-hued and lotus-eyed Krishna jumped headlong down into the lake
(2). That lake, of the river Yamunā, was agitated by his fall. And the
water thereof overflowed (on all sides) like scattering clouds (3). The
huge abode of the serpent (Kālya) was shaken by that sound. And the
serpents, with their eyes reddened with anger, rose up from the water
(4). Thereupon was seen the king of serpents Kālya endued with the hue
of clouds, having eyes reddened with ire, five hoods, a fiery
countenance and tongue and effulgent like the flames of fire (5–6). The
entire lake was covered with his hood burning like fire and five huge
and dreadful faces were seen above (the water) (7). When that king of
serpents was burning in his energy and anger the water there appeared as
if boiling and the river Yamunā, stricken with fear, flew in her
opposite course (8). Beholding Krishna coming to the lake and sporting
like a boy he had powerful winds issue out of his mouth filled with the
fire of anger (9). Scintiliations of fire, accompanied by smoke, came
out from the mouth of that king of serpents. All the huge trees, which
were grown on the bank near him, were in no time consumed by the fire of
anger discharged by that king of serpents, resembling the very
incarnation of the end of a Yuga.²¹² Thereupon his son Dāra and his
servants, the other leading serpents of incomparable energy, came there
vomitting the dreadful fire of venom accompanied by smokes (10-12).
Thereupon they made Krishna enter into a circle of their hoods. Having
his hands and feet made incapable of putting forth any exertion he stood
there motionless like a mountain (13). The leading serpents began to
sprinkle Krishna with water vitiated by their teeth. The powerful
Krishna however did not die (14). In the meantime the cow-herd boys,
filled with fear, returned weeping to Vraja and with suppressed voice
said (15):

"Out of foolishness Krishna is drowned in the lake Kālya. The king of
serpents is devouring him. Do ye all come without delay (16). Do ye
speedily go and communicate to Nanda and his followers that Krishna is
being dragged into the lake by the serpent" (17).

Hearing those words like unto the fall of a thunderbolt the milk-man
Nanda was greatly distressed with sorrow and speedily went to that most
excellent lake (18). All the inhabitants of Vraja, accompanied by the
youthful Sangkarshana, boys, old men and young ladies, arrived at the
watery abode of that king of serpents (19). Having reached the the bank
of that lake all the milkmen, headed by Nanda, stricken with shame,
surprise and sorrow, began to bewail with their eyes full of tears. Some
cried, exclaiming "Oh, son!" while others said "Alas! woe to us!"
(20–21). Whereas others, assailed greatly by fear, cried "Alas! We are
all slain!" The women, crying aloud, said to Yashodā "Alas! We are all
killed. Behold your son brought under the control of the king of
serpents. He is trembling there as if churned, like ambrosia, by the
hood of the serpent (22–23). Forsooth, your heart is made of stone,
since it is not breaking assunder even beholding your son in this plight
(24). See, the milkman Nanda, filled with grief, is standing on the bank
of the lake like one unconscious, fixing his look on the face of his son
(25). Following Yashodā we shall rather enter into this lake, the abode
of the serpents. And still we will not return to Vraja without Dāmodara
(26). Without Krishna Vraja shall never appear beautiful like the day
shorn of the sun, or the night shorn of the moon or the cow divorced
from the bull. Separated from Krishna we shall not go there like a cow
without her calf" (27).

Hearing the lamentations of the male and female inhabitants of Vraja,
and of Nanda and the cries of Yashodā, Sangkarshana, who though of one
mind, one body and one intelligence, was still a separate person, said
in anger to Krishna (28–29):—"O Krishna, O thou of large-arms, O thou
who dost enhance the delight of the milkmen, do thou soon destroy this
venomous serpent-king (30). O my brother, O my lord, all these our
relations have human understandings and so they are bewailing for thee
considering thee a human being" (31).

Hearing those wise words of Rohini’s son, Krishna sportively raised up
his arms and rose up snapping the fetters of the serpents (32). And
placing his feet on the hoods of the serpent-king that were above the
water he got hold of his bead with his hands (33). Then rising up, by
force, on his middle head, Krishna, who was adorned with a beautiful
Angada, began to dance there (34). Thus grinded by Krishna the hoods of
that serpent-king became pale and blood came out therefrom. (Kālya) then
with dreadful accents said to him (35). "O Krishna of a beautiful
countenance, unwittingly did I display anger against thee. But now I
have been vanquished and subdued by thee and my venom has been
destroyed. Do thou give me my life and command me whom I am to serve
along with my wife, children and friends (36–37)."

Beholding that five-hooded serpent-king and hearing his distressful
words, the Lord Krishna, having the enemy of serpents²¹³ as his carrier,
replied like one having no anger (38):—"O serpent, I do not wish to
allow you to live in this water of Yamunā. Therefore repair to the ocean
with your wife and kinsmen (39). After this whoever amongst your sons
and servants shall be seen either in the water or on the land of this
province he will be killed by me (40). O king of serpents, let this
water prove wholesome unto all and yourself proceed to the mighty deep.
If you remain here after this you will be visited by a great calamity
that will bring about the termination of your life (41). If Garuda, the
enemy of serpents, behold in the ocean, my foot-marks on your head he
will not kill you" (42).

(Thus accosted by the Lord) that foremost of serpents Kalya, carrying on
his head Krishna’s foot-marks, fled away stealthily from the lake in the
very presence of the milk-men (43). After the king of serpents had thus
fled away vanquished the Lord came out from the water and stood on the
bank. Filled with surprise the milk-men chanted his glories and
circumambulated him (44). Thereupon those milk-men, living in the
forest, delightedly said to Nanda: "Indeed thou art fortunate and a
favourite of the gods since your son is (so very powerful) (45). From
to-day, O sinless one, the powerful Krishna, having large eyes, will be
a refuge of the milk-men in their perils and a protector of the kine in
the cow-shed (46). The water of the Yamunā has become everywhere
delightful and wholesome. From now all our kine will happily range in
every landing stair (47). Really we are milk-men for we have not been
able to know Krishna truly in Vraja like fire covered with ashes" (48).
Thereupon eulogising the immortal Krishna the milk-men, filled with
surprise, entered their hamlet like unto the celestials entering the
Chitraratha garden (49).

²¹² When a cycle terminates every thing in the world is destroyed. The
 serpent is compared to this termination for every thing there was
 destroyed by his dreadful venom.

²¹³ This refers to Garuda whom Vishnu used to ride. Garuda used to
 devour serpents and was thus their enemy.