TITLE: VISHNU’S APPEARANCE

Vaishampayana said;—Listen, O king, duly to the dignity of Vishnu as
Viswa (the lord of protection) to that of Hari in the Satya Yuga, to
that of Vaikunta amongst the gods, to that of Krishna amongst men, to
that of Iswara, and to the motive of his various actions past and future
(1–2). Although invisible the lord assumed forms (at various periods).
Narāyana is the cause of all creations and is eternal (3). This Nārāyana
assumed the form of Hari in the Krita Yuga. Brahmā, Indra, the moon,
Dharma, Sukra and Vrihaspati are all the forms of Nārāyana (4). Yadu’s
son Vishnu became the son of Aditi and passed by the name of king
Indrāvaraja (5). For encompassing the destruction of the Daityas,
Dānavas and Rākshasas, the enemies of the celestials, Nārāyana, out of
favour, became the son of Aditi (6). This Supreme Soul created Brahmā in
the days of yore. And that Prime Purusha, in the first Kalpa, created
all the Prajāpatis (7). They, assuming various forms, became the
founders of many most excellent Brāhmana families. From these
high-souled ones emanated, the eternal Veda¹⁴⁵ consisting of various
branches (8). I have thus recounted the names of the wonderful Vishnu.
Now hear from me the subject that is worthy of being recounted (9).
After the Asura Vitra had been slain and even when Satya Yuga was not
over there took, place the world-renowned war with Tāraka (10). Being
elated with success in war and assisted by the Gandharvas, Yakshas,
Uragas, and Rākshasas the dreadful Dānavas engaged in an onslaught of
the gods, (11). When all the weapons were destroyed in battle, they were
about to be killed by the Dānavas. Accordingly being baffled they sought
refuge with the omniscient, Lord Nārāyana, the God of protection (12).
In the meantime were heard the dreadful mutterings of clouds pouring,
showers of embers that covered the sky with, the-sun, moon and planets
and that were accompanied by lightnings. And seven kinds of wind were
driven against one another (13–14). Assailed by boiling water currents,
the fall of lightnings and the winds, endued with the velocity of
lightnings, and as if being consumed by them the earth began to emit
terrible sounds. Thousands of fire-brands fell down from the sky. Cars
began to fall down and go up. Beholding those portends the people were
stricken with fear as they become at the termination of the four Yugas
(15–17). The whole world was enveloped with darkness and nothing was
visible. The ten cardinal points, being covered with darkness, did not
became visible (18). It appeared as if the incarnate form of the night
of the dark half of the month was veiled by the cloud of dissolution.
The sun being overclouded the whole sky was enveloped with darkness
(19). Dispersing these clouds together with darkness the Divine
black-hued Hari displayed his celestial form (20). His body was
dark-hued like a cloud and his hairs were black like collyrium. In his
dark form Krishna appeared like a dark mountain (21). He put on a
burning yellow raiment and was bedecked with gold. It appeared as if a
body, enveloped with the darkness of smoke, arose like the fire of
dissolution (22). His shoulders had grown eightfold, his heads were
covered with head-gears and his fists were adorned with golden weapons
(23). His hand was delighted with a sword by name Nandaka which was
immoveable like a mountain stricken with the rays of the sun and the
moon and which was tied to a waist-cloth of the hue of Menas stone. The
arrows were like the serpents (24). He held mace, thunderbolt, a
ploughshare, a conch, a discus and a club in his hands. Vishnu was like
a mountain of which the base was forgiveness and the tree was Sree. He
held the Sranga bow in his hand. He was seated on a car to which were
yoked yellow-hued horses, on which were hoisted flags having the emblem
of Garuda painted on them, which had the effulgence of the moon, had
beautiful wheels, of which Mandara mountain was the axle, and the
serpent Ananta was the rein. It had Meru and Kuvera on it, was filled
with stars and planets and adorned with variegated flowers. That lord of
gods, who always gives protection, was seen seated in the sky on an
effulgent celestial car by the gods defeated by the Daityas at a time
when they were stricken with fear (25–28). All the gods, headed by
Indra, at first sent up a shout of exclamation and then sought refuge
with the lord to whom all resort for shelter (29). Hearing this loud
exclamation the kind Deity Vishnu made up his mind for destroying the
gods in that great encounter (30). Stationed in the pure sky, Vishnu,
that foremost of gods, promised to the celestials, saying, "O ye Maruts,
may you fare well, do not fear. Be at ease. I have defeated the Dānavas.
Do ye take back the three worlds." Thus welcomed by the words of the
truthful Hari the gods attained to that supreme delight which they
enjoyed when they obtained ambrosia out of the ocean (31–33).

Thereupon the darkness was removed and the cranes emitted cries.
Auspicious winds blew and the ten directions were cleared up. Shinning
stars began to circumambulate the moon, and other luminous bodies began
to move round the sun. The planets did not oppose one another and all
the rivers grew delightful. Etherial and celestial roads appeared
beautiful (34–36). The rivers began to flow quietly and the oceans did
not suffer any agitation. The internal organs of men worked well (37).
The great saints were shorn of grief and began to chant the Vedic hymns.
Hearing the promise of the Lord that he would slay all the enemies in
battle the fire began to eat sweet and nourishing oblations. Sacrifices
were duly undertaken and the minds of men were delighted (38–36).

¹⁴⁵ The Hindus have received their religion through revelation, the
 Vedas. They hold that the Vedas are without beginning and end. It
 may sound ludicrous how a book can be, without beginning or end.
 But by the Vedas no books are meant. They mean the accumulated
 treasury of spiritual laws discovered by different persons in
 different times. Just as the law of gravitation existed before its
 discovery land would exist if all humanity forgot it, so with the
 laws that govern the spiritual world. The moral, ethical and
 spiritual relation between souls and souls and between individual
 spirits and the Father all spirits were there before their
 discovery and would remain even if we forget them. The discoverers
 of these laws are called Rishis and they are honored by the
 Hindus.