TITLE: THE SAME STORY CONTINUED

Bhishma said:—Thereupon at the words (of my father) I put to Markandeya
with attention the same question which I had put to my father before
(1). The great and virtuous ascetic Markandeya too said to me:—"O
sinless Bhishma, hear with attention, I will describe everything" (2).

Markandeya said:—I have attained longevity by my father’s favour. For my
devotion to my father, I attained great fame in the world in the days of
yore (3). At the termination of the cycle extending over many thousand
years, I carried on hard penances on the mount Sumeru (4). Thereupon one
day I espied a huge car coming from the north of the mountain and
lighting the heaven with its lustre (5). Therein, a vehicle in the midst
of fire, I saw a person measuring a thumb effulgent like fire or the
Sun. Saluting that lord with my head touching the ground I worshipped
him, lying in the vehicle, with _arghya_ and water for washing feet. I
asked that unthought-of (person). "How can I know thee, O lord (6–8)?
Methinks thou hast originated from ascetic energy endued with the
qualities of Nārāyana. Thou art the god of gods" (9). O Sinless one,
that virtuous-souled one as if surprisingly said to me: "You have not
practised well hard penances, so you cannot recognize me (10)." Within a
moment he assumed another most excellent form, the like of which I had
not seen before (11). Sanatkumar said:—"Know me as the first
mind-begotten son of the all-powerful Brahmā. From ascetic energy I have
been born with the essential characteristics of Nārāyana (12). I am that
Sanatkumar who had been celebrated in the Vedas in the days of yore. O
Bhārgava, may good betide you and what desire of yours shall I fulfill
(13)? The other seven irrepressible sons of Brahmā are my younger
brothers. Their families have been established (on this earth) (14).
They are Kretu, Vasishtha, Pulaha, Pulastya, Atri, Angira, and the
learned Marichi—the gods and Gandharvas worship them also. Those
ascetics, worshipped of the gods and Dānavas, are upholding the three
worlds (15). I am leading the life of a _Yatin_.²⁸ Having controlled my
ownself and my passions I was born, O great Muni, and I am still living
so. Know me as an unmarried person. And therefore I have obtained the
appellation of Sanatkumar (16–17). Out of devotion to me, you have been
carrying on hard penances to behold me. Therefore I have come to you,
tell me what desire of yours I can fulfill" (18). On his saying this and
commanded by that all-powerful deity who was pleased with me, I replied
to that eternal god, O descendant of Bharata (19), O sinless one, I then
accosted the ever-existent (deity) regarding the origin of the Pitris
and the fruits of Srāddhas (20). O Bhishma, that foremost of gods has
removed all my doubts. After holding conversation for many years that
virtuous-souled deity said to me:—"O Brāhmana saint, I have been pleased
(with your question), hear from me all in due order (21). O descendant
of Bhrigu, Brahmā created all the gods, thinking that they would
dedicate offerings to him. But leading aside they began to perform
sacrifices in expectation of fruits (22). Then imprecated by Brahmā, the
inhabitants of heaven lost all sense and consciousness. They could not
understand any thing and the entire world was bewildered (23). Then
prostrating themselves before the Grand-Father (Brahmā) they again
prayed to him for the behoof of the world. There upon he (Brahmā) said
to them (14):—’You should undergo a penance for you have committed a
transgression.²⁹ Do ye accost your sons and you will come by true
knowledge (25)’. (Thereupon) for the purpose of going through a penance
they, in great misery, asked their sons, who, self-controlled as they
were, communicated to them (the truth) (26). ’Persons conversant with
religious practices lay down penances for sins committed by words, deeds
and thoughts and they daily perform them (27).’ Then informed of the
true import of _Prāyaschitta_ (penance) the gods regained their
consciousness and were accosted by the sons, saying ’Go ye sons’ (28).
Thus cursed and reviled the gods, at the words of sons, approached the
grand-father (Brahmā) to have their doubts³⁰ removed (29). The Deity
(Brahmā) then said to them:—’Ye are all Brahmavādins.³¹ So what they
have said will come to pass and it will not be otherwise (30). O gods,
ye have given them the body and they have given ye the knowledge and are
undoubtedly your fathers (31). Ye are gods and they are the Pitris and
undoubtedly you are their fathers and they are yours’" (32).

Thereupon the dwellers of heaven returned and said to the sons:—"Our
doubts have been snapped by Brahmā and so we shall be loving towards
each other (33). Since ye, being conversant with religious merit, have
conferred upon us knowledge, you are our fathers. Tell us what do you
seek and what boons may we confer upon you (34). What you have said will
forsooth prove true and not be otherwise. Since you have addressed us as
sons undoubtedly you will be our fathers (35). The Rakshasas, Dānavas
and Nāgas will be entitled to the fruits of an action which a man will
perform without propitiating the Pitris with the performance of
Srāddhas³² (36). Being propitiated by Srāddhas the Pitris will
propitiate the eternal. Moon. And being propitiated by you, they will
continue flourishing every day (37). Being propitiated by Srāddha the
Moon will afford delight to all the worlds consisting of oceans,
mountains, forests and all creatures both mobile and immobile (38). The
Pitris will always confer nourishment and progeny upon those men, who
desirous of nourishment, will perform Srāddhas (39). Being propitiated
with oblations afforded at Srāddhas, the Pitris with the Omnipresent
Grand-Father will advance the prosperity of those who will offer three
_Pindas_ uttering their names and _Gotras_ at the time of Srāddha (40).
This order was formerly announced by Parameshthi Brahmā. Let his words
prove true to-day, O gods, and we are now respectively fathers and
sons".

Sanatkumar said:—Those Pitris are the gods and the gods are the gods,
and they are respectively each other’s fathers (42).

²⁸ A sage whose passions are completely under subjection.

²⁹ For the negligence of not worshipping the true object of
 adoration.

³⁰ The doubt, referred to, is why they were addressed by their sons,
 as sons.

³¹ _Brahmavadins_ means conversant with the knowledge of Brāhmana.
 The sentence is elliptical, the full import is: ye are all
 conversant with the knowledge of Brāhmana but not gifted with Yoga
 powers.

³² It is for this reason the usual practice amongst the Hindus is
 that they perform the Srāddha of their ancestral manes before the
 commencement of any ceremony.