TITLE: KANSA IS INFORMED OF HIS DEATH BY NARADA

Vaishampayana said:—Being informed of the descension of Vishnu and of
the portions of other gods, the celestial saint Nārada repaired to the
city of Mathurā to communicate the future death of Kansa (1). Coming
down from the celestial region and arriving at the garden of Mathurā,
that foremost of Munis sent a messenger to Kansa, the son of Ugrasena
(2). He communicated the arrival of the Muni at the garden. Hearing of
the arrival of Nārada, that Asura, having lotus-like eyes, speedily went
out of his city. He saw there his guest, the praiseworthy Brāhmana saint
Nārada, shorn of all sins, powerful like the sun and effulgent like
fire. Having bowed unto him and worshipped him duly he brought for him a
golden seat shining like fire. That Muni, the friend of Sakra, sat on
that seat (3–6).

He then said to the highly wrathful son of Ugrasena:—O hero, you have
duly worshipped me with works laid down in the scriptures. Hear now and
accept what I say. O my son, ranging in Nandana and Chaitraratha
gardens, in Brahmā and other celestial regions I arrived at the great
mount Sumeru, the friend of the sun (7–9). The gods also followed me.
Having bathed in the holy water of all the sacred rivers I saw the
celestial Gangā of three courses and streams, who dissipates all sins as
soon as she is recollected. Thereupon having bathed, in order, at all
those sacred shrines I saw Brahmā’s palace, resorted to by the Brāhmana
saints and filled with the music of the gods, Gandharvas and Apsaras
(10-12).

Once on a time the Grand-Father held a meeting of the gods on the summit
of the mount Sumeru. I, too, taking up my Vinā, set to tune, came to
that meeting of Brahmā and saw that the Grand-Father and the gods,
adorned with white turbans and diverse jewels, and seated on celestial
seats, were holding counsels (13–14). O great king, I heard there that
they, with their followers, were concerting dreadful measures for your
destruction (15). The child, of the eighth conception of your youngest
sister Devaki who lives in Mathurā, will be your death (16). O hero, it
has been ascertained that your death will proceed from that self-born
(Vishnu) who is the stay of heaven, is the great mystery of the gods and
is identical with all (17), O Kansa, to meet with death at the hands of
that god of Gods, as has been settled upon, is a matter of glory to you.
Therefore remember him now. Try to destroy the conception of Devaki and
enjoy all your wealth and articles of pleasure. I love you very much and
therefore I have come here and described to you what took place on the
summit of the mount Sumeru. I; now leave you. May you fare well (17–20).

Vaishampāyana said:—After Nārada had said this and gone away Kansa,
meditating on his words, began to laugh aloud with his lips open, and
smilingly said to his servants who were before him. "Truly the gods make
fun with Narada and he has no knowledge of things (21–22). Even when I
am seated on my throne, asleep, mad or intoxicated, the gods headed by
Vāsava cannot terrify me the least (23). Who is there in the land of men
who can dare make me angry? I can even agitate the earth with these two
my huge arms (24). From to-day I shall greatly oppress men, beasts,
birds and all other creatures who follow the gods (25). Do ye issue this
command to Keshi, in the shape of a horse, Pralamva, Dhenuka, Aristha,
in the form of a bull, Putanā, Kaliya and other demons (26). Assuming
diverse forms do ye range all over the world and destroy them whom you
will find against me (27). Nārada has said that our fear proceeds from
conception and therefore you should always be informed of the movements
of all those who have been conceived by women (28). When I am your
master you need not be afraid of any accidental calamity. Therefore
freed of all anxiety do ye enjoy objects of pleasure of your own accord
(29). Narada is greatly fond of quarrels and is intent on creating
dissensions. In order to set one against another that Brāhmana, with a
restive mind, travels in all the worlds, creates dissensions even
amongst men of highly quiet temparament and works out enmity amongst
kings by various means" (30–31).

Having vauntingly said this Kansa entered his own palace but his heart
was burning with the fire of anger (32).