TITLE: THE STORY OF THE BIRDS—CONTINUED

Markandeya said:—Those seven ganders, ever practising Yoga and ranging
in the Mānasa lake, namely Padmagarbha, Aravindaksha, Kshiragarbha,
Sulochana, Uruvindu, Suvindu and Hemagarbha, used always to live upon
air and water and nourish their body (1–2). At that time shining in the
grace of his person and surrounded by his female companions the king was
ranging in that forest like the king of celestials in the pleasure
garden of Nandana (3). By their earnestness and other external marks the
king perceived that those birds were Yogins. Then out of shame⁴⁶ and
thinking upon it he returned to his own city (4). He had a highly pious
son by name Anuha. He had his eye on the minutest details of morality
and accordingly became the Defender of Faith (5). Sukha conferred upon
him his accomplished and worshipful daughter Kritvi gifted with all
auspicious marks and endued with the quality of goodness (6). O Bhishma,
formerly Sanatkumār mentioned that beautiful damsel to me as Pivari, the
daughter of the ancestral manes Vahirshadas (7). She was the foremost of
the truthful, beyond the comprehension of persons of uncontrolled mind,
was herself an ascetic, the wife of a Yogin and the mother of a Yogin
(8). I had described this to you before while giving an account of the
ancestral manes. Having placed Anuha on the throne, welcomed the
citizens with a delighted heart and made the Brāhmanas perform the
benedictory rite the king Vibhrāja repaired to the Mānasa lake, where
the ganders were ranging, for carrying on hard austerities (9–10).
Having renounced all desires, abstained from food and living on air only
he began to practise penances on one side of that lake (11). O
descendant of Bharata, his resolution was that he might become the son
of one of them and thus acquire Yoga (12). Having made this resolution
he began to carry on hard austerities and shone there like the sun (13).
O foremost of Kurus, on account of its being rendered brilliant by
Vibhrāja that forest, where the four ascetic ganders and the other three
who had deviated from the path of Yoga gave up their lives, became
celebrated by the name Vaibhrāja (14–15). Being freed from sins those
seven high-souled men (born as birds) were born in the city of Kāmpilya
under the names of Brahmadatta and others (16). Amongst them four, by
knowledge, meditation and asceticism, mastered the holy Vedas and
Vedangas and had (a good) memory. The other three remained in ignorance
(17). Swatantra was born as the highly illustrious son of Anuha by the
name of Brahmadatta. According to his resolution in the previous birth
as a bird he was endued with knowledge, meditation and Tapas and
mastered the Vedas and Vedangas (18). Chitradarshi and Sunetra were born
as _Srotrya_⁴⁷ Brāhmanas, well read in the Vedas with all their
auxiliaries, in the races Vābhravya and Vatsa (19). For having lived
with him in the previous birth they became helpmates to Brahmadatta. The
others were born as Pānchāla, Pinchika and Kandarika (20). Of them
Pānchāla was well versed in the Rig Veda and (accordingly) performed the
duties of a preceptor. Kandarika was well read in the other two Vedas
and acted as _Chhandoga_⁴⁸ and _Adhvaryu_⁴⁹ (21). Anuha’s son, the king
(Brahmadatta), was conversant with the voice of all animals. He was a
great friend of Pānchala and Kandarika (22). Although they were addicted
to vulgar pleasures they, on account of their pristine good deeds, were
conversant with morality, temporal profit and desires (23). Having
installed the sinless Brahmadatta on the throne the foremost of ascetic
kings, Anuha attained to the most excellent state (24). Brahmadatta’s
wife, who was the daughter of Devala, was a great female anchorite. Her
name was Sunnati (25). Thus from Devala Brahmadatta obtained his
daughter the high-minded ascetic Sunnati who was of the same temperament
with him (26).

O descendant of Bharata, in his seventh birth Panchika was the fifth,
Kandarika the sixth and Brahmadatta the seventh. The remaining ganders
were born as brothers in a poor Srotrya family in the city of Kāmpilya
(27–28). Their names were Dhritimān, Sumanā, Vidvān and Tatwadarshi.
They were well read in the Vedas and gifted with keen observation (29).
They were all endowed with the recollection of their pristine birth.
When after having attained to the consummation of Yoga practices and
welcomed their father they were about to depart he said to them "Verily
by your renouncing me you will commit a mighty iniquity. How can you
(all) depart, without removing my poverty and satisfying the other
duties of a son viz—the spreading of progeny, the performing of Srāddha
at Gya, and attending upon me (in my old age) (30-32)."

The twice-born ones again said to their father:—"We will make
arrangements by which you will live (33). Do you go to the sinless king
Brahmadatta and recite before him and his minister the Sloka pregnant
with great import (34). He will then, with great joy, confer upon you
many villages and desired-for objects. Therefore O father, go there"
(35). Having said this and worshipped their father they attained to
beatitude as the result of the practices of Yoga (36).

⁴⁶ He thought–"These are birds and they are practising yoga while I,
 being a man, am only seeking pleasure." He was thus ashamed of his
 own conduct and came back to his city.

⁴⁷ There are two classes of Brahmins, one of them who are the
 superior is called _Kulsa_ and another next to them is called
 _Srotrya_.

⁴⁸ A reciter or chanter of the _Sama Veda_ from _Chhandas_ the metre
 of the _Vedas_ and _Ga_ who sings.

⁴⁹ A Brahman versed in the Yayurveda.