TITLE: AN ACCOUNT OF SWYAMANTAKA JEWEL

Vaishampayana said:—Bhajamāna’s son was Viduratha, the foremost of
car-warriors. The heroic Rajādhideva was Viduratha’s son (1).
Rājādhideva had a number of highly powerful sons, namely the powerful
Datta, Atidatta, Shonaswa, Swetavāhana, Shami, Dandasharmā, Dattashatru
and Shatrujit. They had two sisters by name Shravana and Shravishtha
(2–3). Shami’s son was Pratikshtra whose son was Swayamboja and whose
son was Hridika (4). His sons were of dreadful prowess. Of them
Kritavarmā was the eldest and Shatadhanwā was the second (5). The
celestial saint Chyāvana begat for him four sons and two daughters. The
sons were Vishak, Vaitarana, Suvāntā and Adhidānta. The daughters were
Kamadā and Kāmadantika (6). Kamvalavarhisha had a learned son named
Devavān who had three sons namely Asamouja, Veera and Nāsamoujā (7).
Asamouja had no issue and therefore Andhaka conferred on him his three
sons namely Sudangstra, Suvāhu and Krishna (8). These and various others
members of the Andhaka family have been described to you. He, who daily
meditates upon Andhaka family, forsooth gets his family multiplied.
Krousthu had two wives, Gāndhāri and Mādri (9-10). Gandhāri gave birth
to the highly powerful Anamitra and Mādri gave birth to Yudhājit and
Devamidusha (11). Anamitra was ever irrepressible and subduer of his
enemies. His son was Nighna who had two sons Prasena and Satrājit both
of whom were subduers of hostile armies. Living in the city of Dwarkā
Prasena obtained from the ocean the peerless celestial jewel called
_Swyamantaka_. The sun was his friend as valuable as his life (12–14).
Once on a time after the expiration of the night that foremost of
car-warriors, ascending his chariot, went to the bank of the ocean for
bathing and worshipping the sun (15). When he worshipped the god of rays
the invisible lord Vivaswan appeared in effulgence before him (16).
Thereupon the king said to the Lord Vibhakara before him—"O lord of
rays, I see thee although before me in thy same circular effulgent form
as I always behold thee in the sky. Thou hast appeared before me as a
friend but what special favour have I got (17-18)?" Hearing this, the
lord took out from his neck the peerless jewel _Swyamantaka_ and gave it
to him (19). Thereupon the king saw him in his form. Seeing him he was
pleased and conversed with him for a moment (20). While Vivaswān was
about to go away the king again said to him:—"O lord, it behoveth thee
to confer upon me this jewel with which thou dost always light the
worlds" (21). Thereupon Bhāskara gave him the jewel _Swyamantaka_.
Holding it the king entered his own city (22). All the people followed
him thinking that the sun was going. Filling all the citizens with
wonder the king entered the inner appartment (23). The king Satrajit,
with great delight, conferred that peerless celestial jewel
_Swyamantaka_ on his brother Prasena (24). That jewel used to produce
gold in the palace of Vrishnis and Andhakas. (By its power) the god of
rains used to pour shower in due season and there was no fear of disease
(25). Govinda grew desirous of acquiring that peerless jewel
_Swyamantaka_ from Prasena. Although capable he did not take it by force
or pilfer it (26). Once on a time adorned with that jewel Prasena went
out a-hunting. He was, for that _Swyamantaka_, slain by a wild lion
(27). Killing that flying lion a highly powerful bear took that jewel
and entered into his den (28).

Hearing of the death of Prasena, all the members of Vrishni and Andhaka
families entertained suspicions against Krishna, because they knew that
he had a fancy for that jewel (29). Knowing their suspicion and thinking
that he himself was innocent the virtuous-souled Krishna, resolving "I
must bring the jewel" set out for the forest where Prasena went for
hunting. Following his foot-seps along with his followers and ransacking
the mountains Rikshavan and Vindhya the great Krishna was stricken with
fatigue. He then saw Prasena and his horse killed there but did not find
the jewel. He then saw near Prasena the lion killed by the bear. It was
surmised by the footsteps. Following them he searched for the den of the
running bear (30–34). He heard the voice of a female in the huge den of
that bear. A nurse was giving play with that jewel to Jamvavān’s son and
saying "Do not weep" (35).

The nurse said:—"The lion killed Prasena and he has been killed by
Jamvavān. Therefore, O my good boy, do not weep. This Swyamantaka
belongs to you (36)".

Thereupon keeping all the Yadavas with Baladeva at the mouth of the den
and displaying a beautiful form and voice Krishna, with Sharnga bow,
silently entered into it. And having entered there by force the Lord
beheld the bear (37–38), Govinda wrestled with Jāmvavān in that den for
twenty-one days (39). After Krishna had entered the den all the Yādavas,
headed by Baladeva, returned to Dwarkā and announced that he had been
slain (40).

Having vanquished the highly powerful Jāmvavan he married the most
beloved daughter of the king of bears by name Jamvavati and took away
the jewel for clearing himself (of the charge) (41). Then saluting the
king of Rikshas he came out of the den. Enveloped with great beauty, he,
afterwards, returned to the city of Dwarkā (42). Having thus brought the
jewel and cleared himself of the charge he handed over Swyamantaka to
Satrajit in an assembly of the Sātwatas (43). Having thus acquired the
jewel Swyamantaka Krishna, the slayer of enemies, who had been accused
of a false charge, cleared himself of the guilt (44). Satrajit had ten
wives who gave birth to a hundred sons. Of them three were well-known.
Bhangakara was the eldest, the heroic Bātapati was the second, and
Viyatsnāta was the third. O king, he had three daughters well-known in
all the quarters (45–46). They were Satyabhāmā, the most excellent of
women, Bratini, of firm vows and Praswāpini. Sātrajit married them all
with Krishna (47). Bhangakara had two sons, the foremost of men,
Sabhāksha and Nāreya. Both of them were accomplished, and well-known for
their beauty (48). Madri’s son Yudhajit had a son by name Vrishni. He
had two sons, Shaphalkā and Chitraka (49). Shaphalka married the
daughter of the King of Kashi. Her name was Gāndini and her father used
to give away a cow every day(50). She gave birth to the great Akrura who
was fond of guests and performed sacrifices accompanied with profuse
gifts, Upasanja, Mangu, Mridura, Arimejaya, Girikshipa, Upiksha,
Shatruhā, Arimardana, Dharmabhrit, Yatidharmā, Gridhra, Bhoja, Andhaka,
Suvahu and Prativāhu and to a beautiful daughter by name Sundari. That
beautiful girl was the queen of Virutashwa, was endued with beauty and
youth and was charming unto all (51-54). O descendant of Kuru, Akrura
begat on Ugraseni two sons, Sudeva and Upadeva, who were both powerful
like the celestials (55). Chitraka had many sons, namely, Prithu,
Viprithu, Aswagriva, Ashwavāhu, Supārshwa, Gaveshi, Aristhnemi, Aswa,
Sudharmā, Dharmabhrit, Suvāhu and Vahuvāhu and two daughters by name
Shravishthā and Shravanā. He, who reads of this false accusation against
Srikrishna, suffers from no such thing in his life (56–58).