TITLE: ACCOUNT OF THE KING YAYATI

Vaishampayana said:—The highly energetic Nahusha begat on his father’s
daughter Virajā six sons gifted with the effulgence of Indra (1). They
were Yati, Yayāti, Sang yāti, Ayati and Yāti. And the sixth was Suyāti;
of them Yayāti became the king (2). Yati was the eldest of all. Next to
him was Yayāti. On account of his being the foremost of the pious he
obtained a daughter of Kakuthsthas by name Go. Yati was an ascetic.
Having acquired final liberation he was united with Brahman (3). Of the
other five Yayāti conquered this world. He espoused Sukrācharya’s
daughter Devayani as well as Sharmisthā the daughter of an Asura by name
Vrishaparva (4). Devayāni gave birth to Yadu and Turvasu and
Vrishaparva’s daughter Sharmishthā to Drahyu, Anu, and Puru (5). Being
pleased Sakra gave him a highly effulgent, celestial, golden chariot
going every where without any interruption. White celestial and
excellent horses, fleet like the mind, were yoked to it. By that chariot
he used to accomplish every work. Ascending that car, Yayāti,
irrepressible in battle, within six nights conquered the entire earth
and even the gods with Vāsava (6-7). That car was in the possession of
the Pauravas till Sunāmā was born, O Janamejaya (8). Kuru’s son the king
Parikshit lost that car by the imprecation of the intelligent Gārgya
(9). O Janamejaya, that king slew the harsh-speeched boy of Gārgya and
accordingly he was guilty of the crime of Brahmanicide (10). With a
stench all about his body that royal saint moved about hither and
thither. Then cast off both by the citizens and villagers he could not
enjoy happiness anywhere (11). Thereupon stricken with grief he could
not find relief anywhere. He then sought refuge with the ascetic Indrota
born in the race of Shounaka (12). Indrota then undertook the
celebration of a horse-sacrifice for purifying that king (13). When he
bathed after the termination of a Yajna, that stench disappeared from
his body. Then O king, the lord of gods, with pleasure, gave away that
celestial car to Vasu the king of Chedis; from him Vrihadratha acquired
it (14). From him that car gradually passed into the hands of
Jarāsandha. Thereupon slaying Jarāsandha Bhima, the descendant of Kuru,
delightedly conferred that most excellent car on Vāsudeva.

Having conquered the earth consisting of seven insular continents with
its oceans Yayāti divided it (amongst his sons). Nahusha’s son installed
Turvasa as the king of the south-eastern quarter, Anu and Druhya as the
kings of the northern and eastern divisions respectively, the eldest
Yadu as the king of the north-east, and Puru as the king of the Central
division. Even now they are righteously ruling over the earth consisting
of seven insular continents and various cities in their respective
provinces. O foremost of kings, I shall afterwards describe their
progeny (15–20). Having been thus blessed with five sons and conferred
upon them his bows, arrows and the charge of the kingdom, the foremost
of men, that king Yayāti was possessed by decrepitude. Divested of
weapons when that ever victorious king cast his eyes on the earth he
felt joy. Having thus divided the earth he said to Yadu
(21–22):—"Retiring from thy office, O my son, do thou take this
decrepitude of mine upon thee. Making over my decrepitude to thee and
being gifted with thy youth and beauty I shall range over the earth."
Whereto Yadu replied (23):—"I have promised to give alms to a Brāhmana.
It has not been decided as yet. Without ascertaining this I cannot
accept your decrepitude (24). There are many inconveniences regarding
food and drink in decrepitude. Therefore, O king, I do not like to take
your decrepitude on me (25). O king, you have many other sons who are
more beloved than I. Therefore, O pious king, command any other son of
yours to take your decrepitude" (26).

Thus accosted by Yadu the king was filled with anger. Then blaming his
son Yayāti, the foremost of speakers, said (27):—"O you of vicious
intellect, disregarding me who am your preceptor and who have given you
education, whom else can you seek and what religion can you follow?"
(28) Having addressed Yadu thus in anger he imprecated a curse on him,
saying, "O foolish wight, your sons will be deprived of their kingdom"
(29).

That king, the foremost of Bharatas, likewise requested Turvasu, Drahyu
and Anu and was equally dishonoured by them all (30). Being enraged that
ever victorious Yayāti cursed them all as I had described to you before,
O foremost of the royal saints (31). Having thus cursed his four sons
who preceded Puru the king said to him, O descendant of Bharata (32). "O
Puru, if you agree, I shall transfer this my decrepitude to you and
being invested with your beauty and youth I shall roam over this world"
(33). His powerful son Puru accepted his decrepitude. Yayāti too, endued
with Puru’s beauty, ranged over the earth (34). Seeing the termination
of pleasures, O foremost of Bharatas, that lord lived in the
Chaitraratha forest with Vishrāvyā (35). When he was satiated with
enjoyments the king came to Puru and took back from him his decrepitude
(36). Hear, O great king, the songs sung there by Yayāti. Hearing them a
man withdraws himself from pleasures as a tortoise draws in its limbs
(37). "Desire is never satiated with the enjoy ment of its object. It
rather assumes proportions like a fire when clarified butter is thrown
into it (38). Rice, barley, gold, animals and women, that are on earth,
are not sufficient to afford satisfaction to one man. Seeing this even
men are not brought to their senses (39). When a man does not commit
injury to any creature even by his action, thought and words, he is
unified with Brahman (40). When a man is not afraid of another, when no
one is afraid of him, when he cherishes no desire or malice he is
unified with Brahman (41). Verily does he attain to happiness when a man
relinquishes thirst, which wicked people can never cast off, which does
not wear out even when a man is possessed by decrepitude and which is
like a fatal malady (42). When a man is worn out with age his hairs and
teeth fall off but the desire for life and wealth never disappears (43).
Whatever pleasure is there in this world derivable from the satisfaction
of sensual appetites, whatever great heavenly pleasure is there none of
them is equal to the one sixteenth of the pleasure derived from the
extinction of desire" (44). Having said this the royal saint Yayāti
retired into the forest with his wife and for many long years he carried
on hard austerities (45). Having carried on his penances on the Bhrigu
hill that great ascetic, renouncing his body, attained to heaven with
his wife (46).

O great king, in his family five royal saints were born. By them the
whole earth was occupied as by the rays of the sun (47). Hear now of the
family of Yadu honored by all the royal saints. In his family Nārāyana
Hari, the perpetuator of Vrishni race, took his birth (48), O king, he,
who listens to the sacred biography of the king Yāyāti or reads it,
acquires health, offspring, long life and renown (49).