TITLE: KALANEMI GOES TO VISHNU

Vaishampayana said:—On account of his irreligious actions the Vedas,
virtue, forgiveness, truth and the prosperity of Narayana, these five
did not follow him (Kālanemi) (1). Owing to the absence of the Veda and
others that king of Dānavas approached Nārāyana in order to attain to
his dignity (2). He saw him there seated on Suparna with conch, discus
and club in his hands. He was whirling a beautiful mace for the
destruction of the Dānavas (3). That god, having the hue of a cloud
surcharged with water and wearing a raiment resembling lighting, was
seated at ease on the bird the son of Kashyapa, gifted with golden wings
and a tuft of down on the forepart of head (4).

Beholding the irrepressible Vishnu stationed in battle for the
destruction of the demons, Kālanemi, with a heavy heart, said:—(5).
"This is our most dreadful enemy. They say he cannot be vanquished by
any means. He is the enemy of our Dānava forefathers and that of Madhu
and Kaitava living in the ocean. He has slain many of our forest-born
Daityas. This man, armed with weapons, is highly ruthless in battle and
extremely shameless like a boy. He had the hairs of the Dānava women
shaved (6–8). He is the Vishnu of the gods, the Vaikuntha of the
celestials, the Ananta of the serpents living in the water and the
Creator of the creators himself (9). He is the worshipful of the gods
and is ever engaged in doing us wrong. Incurring his displeasure
Hiranyakasipu was slain (10). Following him the gods are entitled to the
best portion of the sacrificial offerings and three-fold oblations are
offered to fire by the great saints (11). He is the instrument of the
death of all those who are inimical towards the gods. By his discus all
the Dānavas, born in our race, have been slain in battle (12). Risking
his life even for the gods it is he who hurls his discus, effulgent like
the sun, at the enemies in battle (13). This wicked-minded one is like
the death unto the Daityas. Myself, resembling the very Kala himself,
living, he will soon meet with inevitable death (14). By a mere accident
Vishnu has appeared before me to-day. Being grinded by me in battle he
will be humiliated before me (15). Having slain in battle this Nārāyana,
the source of fear unto the Dānavas I shall worship to-day my
predecessors (16). I shall soon kill also the followers of Nārāyana.
Even when born again he oppresses the Dāvanas (17).

"In the days of yore this Ananta again became celebrated by the name of
Padmanābha (lotus-navelled). When the whole universe was converted into
one sheet of water, he, placing the two Dānavas, Madhu and Kaitava
within his knee-joints, killed them (18). Dividing his own body into two
and assuming the form of a man-lion he, in the days of yore, killed my
father Hiranyakasipu (19). Auspiciously did Aditi, the mother of gods,
conceive him who, assuming the form of a dwarf at the sacrifice of the
king Bali, occupied the three worlds with his foot-steps and then killed
him (20). Now encountering me again in this war of Tāraka, he along with
the gods, will meet with death (21)".

Thus villifying Nārāyana in the field of battle in various unbecoming
words Kālanemi expressed his desire for fighting (22). Although censured
by the king of Asuras Gadādhara (Vishnu) was not angry on account of his
extraordinary forgiveness. Rather smilingly he said (23). "O Daitya,
limited is thy strength, still out of anger thou art villifying me.
Since thou hast transgressed forgiveness, thou shalt be slain by thy own
fault (24). Wretched thou art indeed and fie on thy vaunting words. Men
do not live where the females roar (25). O Daitya, I see thou shalt
follow the footsteps of thy predecessors. Disregarding the orders
instituted by Prajapati who can be at ease? (26). I shall slay thee
to-day who hast disturbed the gods. And I shall again place the
celestials in their respective positions" (27). After Nārāyana, bearing
the mystic mark of Srivatsa on his breast, had said this in the
battle-field, the Dānava took up the weapons in anger and began to smile
(28). Uplifting his hundred arms capable of handling all the weapons,
he, with eyes reddened with anger, struck at the breast of Vishnu (29).
The other Dānavas, headed by Maya and Tāra, ran towards Vishnu (30).
Although assailed by the highly powerful Daityas armed with various
weapons the lord Nārāyana remained unshaken in the battle like a
mountain (31). Being engaged in a conflict with Suparna and taking up,
with all his strength, a huge and dreadful club burning with the
concussion of arms, the highly enraged great Asura Kālanemi hurled it at
Garuda. Even Vishnu was filled with wonder seeing that feat of the
Daitya (32). When that club fell on the head of Suparna, that king of
birds, with a wounded body, fell down on earth (33). Thereupon in that
great encounter the Dānavas began to strike Vishnu and Garuda with clods
of earth, stones and thunder bolts. When Nārāyana moved about in the
battle field the gods chanted his glories. "Glory unto thee, O thou of
great arms, O destroyer of Madhu and Kaitava. With thy nails thou didst
tear off Hiranyakasipu." Thus eulogised by the deities Nārāyana rose up
from the battle-field. Considering Vishnu slain the king of Dānavas blew
his conch. The great Asuras began to play on the three sorts of
Mridangas and dance in accompaniment with the music. It appeared that a
great festivity was taking place at that time. Beholding Suparna wounded
and his own body unscathed, Vaikuntha, with eyes reddened in anger, took
up his discus (34–35). The lord then grew highly impetuous along with
Suparna. His arms multiplied covering the ten quarters (36). Filling up
all the quarters, the etherial region and the earth he increased his
energy as if being desirous of attacking again all the worlds (37). The
Rishis, along with the Gandharvas, began to chant the glories of
Madhusudana who had then assumed a huge proportion in the sky for the
victory of the gods (33).

The Lord covered the celestial region with his Kiritin, the sky and the
clouds, with his raiment, the earth with his feet and all the quarters
with his arms. Thereupon worked up with anger Gadādhara, taking up his
discus capable of performing unparalleled feats and effulgent like the
sun, destroyed with it, by virtue of his own energy, the effulgence of
the Dānavas in battle and chopped off the arms of Kālanemi. It was
dreadful like the burning fire of a thousand flames resembling the rays
of the sun and at the same time beautiful and covered with golden
wheels. It was strong like a thunder-bolt, dreadful and besmeared with
the blood, fat and bones of the Dānavas. It had none to equal it in the
matter of striking, was sharpened like a razor, could go any where and
could assume any form at will. It was made by the Self-born himself, was
a terror to the enemies, possessed by the anger of the great Rishis and
was haughty in the battle field. When it is thrown, all the creatures,
mobile and immobile, are stupified and creatures, living on flesh,
derive greatest satisfaction (36–46). Then with his strength Hari began
to grind the hundred dreadful faces of that demon with wild laughs like
the grinding of fire (47). Although his arms were chopped off and his
heads were cut off the Dānava did not tremble the least in the battle
and stood there like a tree shorn of all its branches (48).

Thereupon spreading his two huge wings and assuming the velocity of the
wind Garuda, with the stroke of his breast, felled down Kālanemi.
Thereupon rolling and leaving the celestial region his body, shorn of
heads and arms, fell down on earth from the sky (49–50). When that
Daitya was killed the Rishis, together with the gods, began to praise
Vaikuntha saying "Well done! Well done!" (51). The other Daityas, who
were witnessing his prowess in battle, were hemmed in by the arms of
Vishnu and could not move in the field (52). The Lord held some Daityas
by the hair, held some by the throat, wounded some on the face and took
up some by the waist (53). Entirely destroyed by the club and discus and
deprived of their energy and life they fell down on earth from the sky
(54). After all the Daityas had been slain, that foremost of Purushas
Gadadhara, scoring success, stood there doing good to the king of gods
(55). After the termination of that dreadful war with Tāraka where many
had been grinded the grand-father of all, Brahmā speedily came there
along with all the Brāhmana saints, Gandharvas and Apsarās. Worshipping
Hari the god of gods said (56–57).

Brahma said:—"O lord, thou hast accomplished a great work; the dart of
the celestials has been uprooted. By the destruction of the Daityas we
have been pleased (58). Thou alone art the only destroyer of this
Kālanemi whom thou hast just slain in battle. Save thee there is none
else who could kill him (59). Vanquishing the gods and all the creatures
mobile and immobile this Dānava used to assail the Rishis; even he used
to roar at me (60). Therefore by this thy powerful feat I have been
greatly pleased, since thou hast destroyed this death-like Kālanemi
(61). Mayst thou fare well; let us now repair to the most excellent
celestial region, where the Brāhmana saints, the members of thy court,
are waiting for thee (62). O Achyuta, O foremost of speakers, I shall
worship thee there along with the Maharshis with heavenly hymns (63). O
thou the foremost of boon givers, although thou dost confer boons on the
celestials and Daityas I shall bestow one on thee (64). O Nārāyana, in
this war thou hast freed the three worlds of the thorns and therefore do
thou now confer upon the high-souled Sakra the prosperous kingdom over
the three worlds" (65).

Thus addressed by the Divine Brahmā, the Lord Hari said to Indra and
other gods in auspicious words (66). "Listen attentively, all ye gods
headed by Purandara, who have assembled here (67). We have slain, in
this battle, many powerful Danavas, Kalnemi and others, who are superior
even to the king of gods himself (68). In this terrible encounter came
out both Virochana’s son Bali and the huge-bodied Rāhu (69). Let now the
king of gods and Varuna repair to their wished-for regions. Let Yama
occupy the south and the king of riches protect the north (70). As
before let the noon be united with the stars in proper season. Let the
sun, being united with equinoctial points, distribute the seasons all
through the year (71). Let sacrifices be duly undertaken honoured by the
ascetic courtiers and let the Vipras, according to the rituals laid down
in the Vedas, offer oblations to fire (72). Let the gods attain
gratification from Vali oblations, the Maharshis from the chanting of
the Vedas and the ancestral manes from the performance of Srādhas as
before (73). Let the wind blow in its own course, let the fire be
enkindled in its three-fold forms, and let the three Varnas, by their
natural qualities, bring about the gratification of the world (74). Let
sacrifices be undertaken by the Brāhmanas who are worthy of performing
initiatory rites and let all the proper sacrificial gifts be distributed
(75). Let the sun afford gratification to all the eyes and let the moon
afford delight to all the juices and let the air delight the vital
breaths of all creatures, and let them all undertake good and auspicious
works (76). Let the rivers, carrying water from the huge mountains and,
the mother of the three worlds, gradually in proper order, proceed to
the ocean (77). Let the gods cast off all fear of the Dānavas and let
them enjoy peace. May you fare well, O ye gods, I repair to the eternal
region of Brahmā (78). Do not live always confidently in your celestial
region and specially in the battle-field for the demons are highly
deceitful (79). They strike people as soon as they find a weak point.
This order of the world is not permanent. You are all gentle and simple
and your mind always moves in innocent matters. O gods, I bring about
the stupefaction of all these wicked demons who cherish a desire of
injuring you (81). Whenever you will cherish a dreadful fear of the
Dānavas I will immediately come and promise you safety (32)."

Having thus addressed the gods the highly illustrious Nārāyana, having
truth for his prowess, repaired with Brahmā to his own region (83). This
was the wonderful encounter, of which you asked, of Nārayana and the
Dānavas in the war of which Tāraka was the root (84).