TITLE: JARASANDHA’S INSTRUCTIONS TO THE KINGS

Vaishampayana said:—Surrounded by his four-fold forces moving like the
ocean, the highly effulgent and powerful king Jarāsandha, observant of
vows and the leader of kings, arrived there. He had with him
war-chariots drawn by spirited horses, trained by expert warriors whose
course was not impeded any where, cloud-like elephants, adorned with
bells, carrying a golden room with warriors proud of battle and driven
by clever drivers, horses leaping and fleet like the wind governed by
clever drivers and numberless infantry armed with swords, daggers and
leathern fences who could leap even high up into the the sky. A host of
kings also followed him (1-6). All the caves of that best of mountains
and all the quarters echoing with the clatter of car wheels resembling
the muttering of clouds, the noise of the elephants in rut, the
neighings of the horses and the leonine shouts of the infantry, the
emperor Jarāsandha, with his army, was seen there like an ocean (7-8).
Striking this palms against each other and slapping their arms that army
of the kings, abounding in delighted warriors, shone there like an army
of clouds (9). That army, variegated with cars, fleet like the wind,
with elephants resembling the clouds, with horses resembling white
clouds and with well dressed infantry, shone like clouds kissing the
ocean after the termination of the rainy season (10–11). Thereupon those
powerful kings, headed by Jarāsandha, encamped encircling that mountain
(12). At that time the encampment of those kings lying outside shone
like the full ocean during the full moon (13).

After the expiration of the night, the kings, having performed the
auspicious ceremony of Koutuka, rose up for ascending the hill for fight
(14). Having assembled at the valley of the mountain they, out of
curiosity, began to hold counsels befitting the hour of battle (15).
There was heard thus a great tumult like that of the upheaving of the
ocean at the time of the dissolution of the world (16). With Kanchika
turbans on their heads and canes in their hands the warders began to
move about on all sides exclaiming "_Ma_" _i.e._ (do not make noise)
(17). That army, hushed into silence, imitated the form of the ocean
abounding in fishes and huge serpents (18). When informed of the mandate
of the king that ocean-like army stood silent and motionless the king
Jarāshdha, like the preceptor of the gods, addressed them, saying
(19):—"United soon let the armies of the kings completely besiege this
mountain (20). Let rocky weapons and clubs be got ready and prāshas and
Tomaras be placed on high (21). In order to throw up let artizans make
ready means of obstructing the speedy fall of weapons (22). Let what,
the king of Chedi speaks to heroes engaged in fighting with one another,
and inebriete with desire for battle, be carried out (23). Rive this
foremost of mountains with Tankas and Khanitras and let kings, expert in
fighting, be placed at no distance (24). As long as I do not kill the
two sons of Vasudeva let my army remain besieging the mountain (25). You
will so besiege this mountain sprung from rocks and you will so obstruct
the sky with arrows that even the birds may not go out of it (26). Let
the kings, at my command, wait at the base of the mountain and get up on
it as soon as an opportunity presents itself (27). Let Madra, the king
of Kalinga, Chekitān, the king of Valhika, Gonarda the king of Kāshmira,
the king of Karusha, Druma of Kimpurushā, and mountainous tribes ascend
the mountain from the other side (28–29). Let Venudari of the Puru race,
Vidarbha, king Somaka, Bhoja, king Rukshmi, Mālava, Suryaksha, Drupada,
the king of Panchala, Vinda and Anuvinda of Avanti province, the
energetic Dantavakra, Chhāgali, Purumitra, the emperor Virat, the king
of Koushāmvi, Mālava, Shrutadhanwā, Veduratha, the king of Trigarta,
Bhurisrava, Vana and Panchnava, let these kings, powerful like
thunderbolt and expert in capturing a fort, get up on this mountain from
the north and assail it (30-33). Let Ansumāna’s heroic son Kaitaveya,
Uluka, Ekalavya, Dridaksha, Jayadratha, ever observant of Kshatriya
duties, Uttamoujā, Shālwa, the king of Kerala, Koushika, Vāmadeva, the
king of Vidishā and powerful Sukeshi get upon the mountain from the east
and rive it as the wind dissipates the clouds (34–36). Myself, Darada
and the powerful king of Chedi, shall rive the western side of the
mountain (37). In this way let the mountain be beseiged completely on
all sides by our men and entertain a terrible fright as from the fall of
a thunder-bolt (38). Let the holders of clubs with clubs,
Parigha-holders with Parighas and other warriors with diverse other
weapons rend this foremost of mountains (39). O ye kings, you shall
have, even to day to level this mountain abounding in high, uneven and
dangerous rocks" (40).

As the oceans lie encircling the earth, so those kings, at the command
of Jarāsandha, stood encircling the mount Gomanta (41). Thereupon the
king of Chedi, like unto Indra the king of gods, said:—"What is the use
of capturing like a fort this foremost of mountains Gomanta impassable
with high trees and abounding in high summits. Covering it on all sides
with twigs and woods we shall burn it even this very day. What is the
use of making any other effort? Besides the Kshatriyas are tender and
they fight with arrows in battle. We should not engage them to fight on
foot in a mountain. By besieging or rising above it even the gods cannot
rend this mountain. O king, to lay a siege is proper when capturing a
fort (42–46). Those, who take shelter on a mountain, yield when they
fall short of food, water and fuels. Although we are many in number we
should not disregard the two Yadavas stationed in fight. This is not a
wise policy. We do not know the strength of those two Yadavas. By their
actions they have acquired celestial reputation. And although they are
boys they accomplish many difficult feats (47–49). Placing all round
this mountain dried grass and woods we shall set fire to them. Consumed
thereby they will give up their life (50). If on being burnt they come
out of the mountain and approach us we shall, all united, kill them and
they too will meet with death" (51).

The kings with all the soldiers liked what the king of Chedi said for
their well-being (52). Thereupon as a cloud is stricken with the rays of
the sun so that mountain was ablaze with with dried woods, grass and
twigs (53). According to the course of the wind and place the
light-handed kings set fire on all sides of that mountain (54). Then the
fire, excited by the wind, conflagrated on all sides, and with the
lustre its flames, accompanied by smokes, beautified the sky (55). Thus
the fire, begotten by the collection of woods, began to burn up the
beautiful mountain Gomanta abounding in beautiful trees (56). And that
burning mountain being rent assunder into a hundred (pieces) huge rocks
began to come out from all sides, looking like huge fire brands (57). As
the sun, with its lustre, lights up the clouds, so the fire lighted up
the mountain with its rising flames (58). It appeared as if pained with
molten metals, burning trees and agitated beasts that mountain was
weeping (59). From that heated mountain which was being consumed by fire
began to come out molten metals of golden, dark-blue and silvery hues
(60). With its half enshrouded with the darkness of smoke, that
mountain, covered with flames of fire, was shorn of beauty like
disappearing clouds (61).

With the detached collection of rocks and the dreadful down-pour of
embers that mountain appeared like a cloud accompanied by a shower of
fire-brands (62). With springs of water rising up and enveloped with
smokes the mount Gomanta appeared to have been consumed by the fire of
dissolution (63). With half of this body burnt, serpents, having huge
hoods, overwhelmed, with anxious eyes and sighing, began again and again
to leap up and fall down with their heads bent downwards (64). Assailed
by fire and excited the lions and tigers began to cry and the trees
began to yeild juice consequent upon burning (65). Rendered coppery with
ashes and embers the wind began to rise and cover the sky, with smokes,
like clouds (67). On account of the spread of fire the birds and beasts
left the table-lands and the mountain became agitated (68). As if rent
by the thunder-bolt of Vāsava that mountain, abounding in shaken and
high rocks, began to throw out rocks (69). Thus setting fire to that
mountain and themselves distressed by it the Kshatriyas retreated to a
distance of a mile (70).

When that foremost of mountains was thus burnt the great trees were so
scorched that none could look at them, and the root (of the mountain)
was slackened, Rāma in anger, said to the lotus-eyed Krishna, the slayer
of Madhu (71–72). "O my brother Krishna, on account of their enmity
towards us the enemies are consuming this mountain along with its
table-lands, summits and trees (73). Behold O Krishna, the leading
twice-born ones, who are living in the forest of the mountain assailed
by fire and covered with smokes, are as if weeping (74), O brother, if
this Gomanta is burnt down on our account we shall acquire great censure
and blame in the world (75). Therefore O foremost of warriors, in order
to satisfy our debt to this mountain whose shelter we have taken we
shall destroy the Kshatriyas with our very arms (76). Setting fire to
this mountain these foremost of car-warriors, the Kshatriays, well
armed, are signifying their desire for battle. (We shall despatch them
to the abode Yama)" (77). Saying this Keshava’s elder brother, bedecked
with a garland of wild flowers, beautiful Kundalas and crown, inebriete
with Kādamvari wine, resembling an autumnal moon, clad in a blue
raiment, of white face, the beautiful Baladeva jumped down in the midst
of kings from the summit of Gomanta like the moon from the summit of
Sumeru (78-80). When Rāma leaped down, the beautiful Krishna, too of
incomparable energy, resembling a dark-blue cloud, jumped down from the
summit of Gomanta (81). Thereat the divine Hari, assailing that foremost
of mountains with his two feet, its four sides were broken down (82).
Thereupon, water, issuing from its rocks, resembling elephants in rut,
immediately extinguished that fire as the sun, at the end of a cycle,
puts down the fire of dissolution with showers. Having thus put down the
fire the powerful lotus-eyed Krishna, of a gentle face and leonine
voice, carrying a beautiful diadem like that of the thousand eyed deity
and bearing the mystic mark of Srivatsa on his breast, followed Rāma by
jumping. When they got down the foremost of mountains, assailed with
their foot-steps, began to yield water for extinguishing the flaming
fire. Beholding that fire extinguished by water the kings too grew
terrified (83–87).