TITLE: AN ACCOUNT OF THE PRIMEVAL CREATION

Having saluted Hari, the master of senses and the preceptor or the
mobile and immobile, the Prime Purusha Icāna, who is eulogised and
propitiated with oblations by many in sacrifices, who is real, who is
Brahman, shorn of all attachments, is both manifest and not manifest,
who does exist for ever, who is above the real and unreal and from whom
has emanated this universe, visible and invisible, who is above all, the
creator of all, ancient, great and undecaying; who is joy and the giver
of joy, who is Vishnu, the worshipful of all, sinless and pure, the
virtuous-souled great Muni Kulapati⁶ Sounaka, well-read in all
scriptures, said to Souti in the forest of Naimisha (1-4).

Sounakla said:—O Souti, you have recounted the great history of the
descendants of Bharata as well as that of other kings; of the gods,
demons, Gandharvas, serpents, Rākshasas, Daityas, Siddhas and of
Guhyakas as well (5-6). You have described in sweet words the most
excellent and sacred Purāna, dealing with their wondrous deeds, heroic
feats and religious practices and their births. This nectarine theme,
affording pleasure unto the mind and ears, O Souti, has given us
satisfaction. O son of Lomaharshana, while describing the birth and
history of the Kurus, you forgot to narrate the history of Vrishnis and
Andhakas.⁷ It becomes you to relate their history (7–9).

Souti said:—I shall now relate to you the story of the birth of Vrishnis
from the very beginning about which the pious disciples of Vyasa,
Vaishampāyana was accosted by Janamejaya (10). Hearing the complete
history of the descendants of Bharata, the highly wise Janamejaya, born
in their race, said to Vaishampāyana (11).

Janemejaya said:—You described before in full and I heard the story of
Mahābhārata full of many meanings and Historical accounts (12). Therein
you mentioned the names and deeds of many mighty car-warriors and heroes
of the Vrishni and Andhaka families (13). O foremost of the twice born,
you have described briefly and fully their many excellent deeds (14).
Though this ancient story has been recounted again and again, still I
have not been satiated with it. The Pāndavas and Vrishnis are related to
each other; you are competent enough to describe their families and you
have with your own eyes seen everything. Therefore, O you having
asceticism for your wealth, do you describe their family at length
(15–16). I wish to know who were born in which families. Therefore, O
great ascetic, beginning with the Patriarch and recollecting their
previous creations, do you describe truly everything at length (17).

Souti said:—Having been welcomed and accosted by him, the high-souled
ascetic of rigid austerities described in full the whole story from the
very beginning (18).

Vaishampayana said:—Listen, O king, to the sacred theme, as narrated by
me, heavenly, destructive of sins, wonderful and abounding in various
meanings and sacred stories (19). He, who circulates this story or
listens to it constantly, multiplies his own family and is spoken high
of in the celestial region (20). This universe, permeated by Isvara
(God), emanated from Pradhāna Purusha who is the unmanifest cause,
eternal and identical with the existent and non-existent (21). Know him,
O monarch, as Brahmā (Creator) of incomparable energy, the creator of
all beings and ever devoted to Nārāyana (Vishnu) (22). From _Mahat_ has
emanated _Ahankara_; from the latter the five subtle elements have
sprung and from them the grosser elements: thus the eternal work of
creation is carried on.⁸ Hear, I shall relate as I have heard and as I
think, of the long extending genealogies of families increasing the
glory of their fore-fathers (23–24). The account of these pious men of
everlasting glory always gives fruit and leads to the multiplication of
race and attainment of heaven (25). On account of this theme being
fruitful and because you are competent to hear it and are pure I shall
relate, to you, beginning with the family of Vrishnis the most excellent
creation of beings (26).

Thereupon desirous of creating various creatures the Divine Self-sprung
(Brahmā) at first created waters and then created seeds therein (27).
The waters are designated as Nārā for they are the offspring of Nara.
The deity first rested thereon and is therefore called Nārāyana (28).
The egg, lying in the waters, assumed golden hue—from that sprang
Brahmā, of his own accord and he is (therefore) called Self-sprung (29).
Having lived there for many years the divine Hiranyagarbha divided the
egg into two and they were called the heaven and earth (30). The Lord
created Akāsa or space between the two portions and in the waters he
created the floating earth and the ten quarters (31). There-upon
desirous of creating the Patriarchs or lords of creation he created
time, mind, speech, passion, anger and desire (32). The highly effulgent
deity then created his seven mind-born sons—Marichi, Atri, Angiras,
Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu and Vashistha. (33). These seven have been
ascertained as Brāhmanas in the Puranas. These seven created by Brahmā,
are like Nārāyana himself (34). There-upon Brahmā created Rudra born of
his anger and Sanat Kumar, the predecessor of those born before (35). O
descendant of Bharata, these seven and Rudra engaged in the work of
creation. Skanda and Sanat Kumar sustained the energy of creation (36).
Their seven great families consisted of Yakshas, Pishachas, the
celestials and others who all performed heavenly deeds and created
progeny and were adorned with Kaçyapa and other leading saints (37). He
then created lightning, thunderbolt, the straight and bent rainbows, the
rangers of the sky and clouds (38). He, then for the successful
celebration of Paynas, created Riks, Yuyush and Sāman; he then created
the gods from his mouth and the ancestral manes from his breast (39). He
then engendered human beings from his organ of generation and from his
hips the Asuras, Sādhyas and other classes of gods. This we have heard
(40). From the body of the Patriarch Vashishtha when he was desirous of
creating progeny, sprang the various kinds of elemental creations (41).
When the progeny, created by his mind, did not multiply he divided his
own body into two and with the half he created man (42). With the other
half he created woman and through her he engendered various kinds of
progeny. He resides enveloping the heaven and earth with his own glory
(43). Vishnu created a universal form which again created a Purusha: You
should know him as Manu and his regeme is known as Manwantara (44). The
second creation of Washishtha is called Manwantara. The great Virat
Purusha created the progeny. He is the creation of Nārāyana and his
progeny are not born in any sex (45). Having known this primaeval
creation a man gains longevity, fame, wealth, progeny and his wished-for
region (46).

⁶ The head of the family of Rishis of the same name.

⁷ Two clans representing two royal families of ancient India.

⁸ According to Sankhya _Mahat_ is the intellect. It is the
 intellectual principle which appertains to individual beings.
 _Ahankara_ is self consciousness or the consciousness of _ego_.
 The five subtle elements are _Akasa_ or ether, air, fire, water
 and earth. By them are produced the four kinds of grosser elements
 such as _Viviparous_ born from the womb as man and other animals;
 _oviparous_, or born of the egg as birds, fishes and serpents;
 those engendered by heat and damp as insects and worms; and those
 springing from the earth—as vegetables, trees &c.