TITLE: UGRASENA RECEIVES KRISHNA

Janamejaya said:—O Brahman, when the Lord Krishna, endued with Sakra’s
prowess, set out from the city of Bidarbha he did not ride the highly
powerful son of Vinatā, Garuda; why did he then take him away with him?
And what did Vinatā’s son do? O great Muni, I am filled with great
curiosity in this; do thou unfold the mystery (1–2).

Vaishampāyana said:—O king, listen to the work, difficult of being done
by men, which the highly effulgent son of Vinatā performed after his
departure from the city of Bidarbha (3). O lord, before his departure to
the city of Mathurā when Janārddana, the god of gods, said before the
assembled kings, "I shall repair to the charming city of Mathura
governed by the Bhoja king" the beautiful and intelligent son of Vinatā
thought for a considerable time, and then saluting Vāsudeva, after he
has finished his say, said with folded hands (4–6).

Garuda said:—"O god, I shall now proceed to Raivata’s city Kushasthali,
to the charming mount Raivata and the adjacent forest thereto resembling
the garden of Nandana (7).

"The Rākshasas have abandoned the charming city of Kushasthali. It is
situate at the base of the Raivata mountain and on the bank of the great
ocean. It abounds in trees decorated with filaments of flowers, in
groves and creepers. It is scattered with elephants and serpents, and
inhabited by bear, monkeys, boars, buffaloes and deer. I shall perfectly
examine (that place) and see if it is worthy of thy habitation. O lord,
if that extensive and charming city is fitted for thy residence, I shall
remove all the thorns and come back to thee" (8-10).

Vaishampāyana said:—Having thus expressed himself before Janārddana, the
king of gods, and saluted him the powerful lord of birds set out towards
the western direction (11). And when Krishna too, with the Yadavas,
entered into the beautiful city of Mathurā, Ugrasena came out of the
city with dancing girls and citizens and honored the victorious Krishna
(12).

Janamejaya said:—What did the mighty-armed Emperor Ugrasena do when he
heard of Krishna’s installation by the numberless kings (13)?

Vaishampāyana said:—Hearing of Krishna’s installation as the Emperor by
numberless kings, of Indra’s making peace with him through his envoy
Chitrangada, of the apportionment of wealth, each king being entitled to
a lakh, each emperor to a Arvuda and each ordinary men to ten, and that
every one, who came there, did not go away empty handed and that the
graceful lord of Nidhis, Sanka, commanded by the gods, distributed
wealth after Krishna’s heart, from his own men and other persons
informed of people’s conduct, Ugrasena offered a great _puja_ at the
temples of the tutelary deities. The two sides of the gate of Vasudeva’s
house were decorated with flags, pennons and garlands. He also decorated
with flags Kansa’s assembly hall Suprabhā adorned with various sheets of
cloth (14-20). The doors of the sitting-room of the Emperor Krishna in
Gopura were pasted with ambrosia by the king (21). There was dancing and
music on all sides. The city was decorated with flags, garlands of wild
flowers and jars full of water (22). The king sprinkled sandal water in
all the high-ways and spread sheets of cloth on the ground (23). On both
sides of the roads incense was kept in vessels and continually burnt
with Aguru, molass and various other articles (24). The elderly women
began to sing benedictory hymns and youthful damsels moved about
anxiously in their respective houses (25).

Having thus commenced the festivity in the city the Emperor Ugrasena
repaired to Ugrasena’s Palace and after communicating to him the
pleasant news and consulting with Rāma went to the car. O king, in the
meantime the great sound of the conch-shell Pānchajanya was heard.
Hearing that sound of the conch the entire city of Mathurā, with their
women, boys, elderly men, panegyrists, songsters, and accompanied by a
huge army, issued out placing Rāma before them. Ugrasena himself carried
_arghya_ and water for washing feet for Krishna (26–29).

After going over to some distance and coming within the view of Vāsudeva
the Emperor Ugrasena desired to proceed on foot and accordingly got down
from his white car (30). And beholding Hari, the king of gods, seated on
a charming car adorned with celestial jewels he, in words suppressed
with joy, said to the lotus-eyed Rāma the slayer of his enemy’s army.
Krishna was adorned with ornaments set with jewels, was shining like the
sun on account of the garland of wild flowers decorating his breast, was
accompanied by fans, umbrellas and flags with the emblems of Garuda
painted thereon, embellished with all the marks of royalty and endued
with the beauty of the rising sun (31–34).

(Ugrasena said):—"O great one, it does not behove me to proceed on car
after this. Thinking this I have got down. Do thou go on the car (35).
Coming to Mathurā in the disguise of Keshava Vishnu has manifested
himself as the king of gods in the ocean-like assemblage of the kings. I
therefore wish to chant his glories properly." The highly effulgent
elder brother of Krishna (then) replied to the king (saying) (36–37):

"O king, it is not proper to chant the glories of that best of kings at
the time of his going. Without it Janārddana is pleased with you. What
is the use of hymning him who is himself propitiated? Your visit is
identical with your chanting of his glories. While Krishna, although he
has acquired the dignity of the Lord Paramount, is coming to your house,
what is the use of praising him with celestial and super-human hymns?"
Thus conversing with each other they went to Keshava (38–40).

Beholding the king Ugrasena approach with _arghya_ in his hands Krishna,
the foremost of orators, stopped his car and said:—"O king of Mathurā,
while I have installed you, declaring, ’Be you the lord of Mathura’ it
does not behove me to make it otherwise. O king, you should not offer me
_arghya_ and water for washing my feet and rinsing my mouth. This is my
heart-felt desire (41-43). O king, informed of your intention I say that
you are the king of Mathura. Do not make it otherwise. O king, I will
confer upon you your proper share in the land and gift. As I did with
the other kings I had kept your share in reserve beforehand, one hundred
thousandth portion without any ornaments or raiment. O king, get upon
your white car adorned with gold, umbrella, fans, flags and celestial
ornaments. And wearing your crown of sunny lustre govern the city of
Mathurā, delightedly with your sons and grand-sons, defeat your enemies
and multiply the Bhoja race. The king of gods, the holder of
thunder-bolt sent, for Ananta and Shouri, celestial ornaments and
raiments. From the thousand jars of gold coins reserved for the citizens
of Mathurā in that ceremony of installation the king of gods has ordered
that one thousand should be given to each of the panegyrists and bards,
one hundred to each old man, prostitute and other men and ten thousand
to each of the Yādavas, Vikadru and others who live with the king
Ugrasena (44–52)".

Vaishampāyana said:—Having thus honored the Emperor Ugrasena in the
presence of all the soldiers Janārddana, with great delight, entered the
city of Mathurā (53). On account of the celestial ornaments, garlands,
raiments and unguents it appeared as if he was living in the city of the
celestials encircled by gods (54). Like unto the muttering of clouds
there arose a great tumult consisting of the sound of bugles and
trumpets, blare of conches, the noise of elephants, the neighing of
horses, the leonine shouts of the heroes and rattle of car-wheels
(55-56). The panegyrists began to sing his praises and the subjects to
salute him with numberless presents. At this Hari was not the least
surprised (57). He was high-minded by nature, shorn of egoism and has
seen a greater display than this beforehand. And for this he was not
filled with surprise (58). Beholding Mādhava’s arrival who was shining
in the lustre of his own person effulgent like the sun the inhabitants
of Mathurā saluted him at every step and said (59):

"He is Nārāyāna, the abode of Shree living in the ocean of milk. Leaving
his serpent-couch he has come to the city of Mathurā (60). Having
chained Bali irrepressible unto the immortals he conferred the
soverignty of the three worlds on Vasava the wielder of thunder-bolt
(61). Having slain Kansa, the foremost of the powerful and other Daityas
this slayer of Keshi has conferred the kingdom of Mathura on the Bhoja
king (62). Not being himself installed and not sitting on the royal
throne, he, having acquired the dignity of the Lord Paramount, has
entrusted Ugrasena with the government of Mathurā" (63).

Having heard this conversation of the citizens, the bards, panegyrists
and the poets sang, "O thou the ocean of accomplishments, how can we,
who are one tongued men, sing the deeds begotten of thy prowess and
energy (64–65). The thousand-headed serpent-king Vāsuki, who has the
intellect of a god, can, with his two thousand tongues, to a certain
extent describe thy accomplishments (66). It is a great wonder to the
kings of the earth that a throne was sent by Indra. It never happened
before nor will it be in future (67). The descension of the
assembly-hall and jars from the celestial region has never been heard of
or seen. Therefore we consider it as a wonder (68). O Keshava,
conceiving a son like thee, the foremost of gods, Devaki, the best of
damsels, has been blessed because she, with her eyes full of affection,
saw thy lotus face adored by men and the immortals (69–70)".

Placing Ugrasena before them and listening to the conversation regarding
their praises sung by the citizens the two brothers Rāma and Krishna
arrived at the gate and the king worshipped them repeatedly sending for
_arghya_ and water for washing feet and rinsing mouth (71–72). Thereupon
approaching Keshava’s car, saluting him with his head down and mounting
on an elephant the energetic and intelligent Ugrasena began to shower
gold as the clouds discharge their watery contents (73). Having thus
showered gold on him the beautiful Mādhava arrived at his father’s house
and said to Ugrasena, the king of Mathura (74): "O lord, although I have
secured the dignity of the Lord Paramount, this throne, conferred by the
king of gods, should be kept in the king’s Palace (75). Although
acquired by the strength of my own arms I do not like to come by the
assembly-hall of the king of Mathurā. O lord, I propitiate you. Do not
be offended" (76).

O king Janamejaya, at that time Vasudeva, Devaki and Rohini were so much
overwhelmed with joy that they could not give vent to any word (77).

O king, thereupon considering the importance of time and place, Kansa’s
mother, taking riches and presents of various countries acquired by him,
went to Keshava and dedicated them to his feet. Observing it Krishna
sent for Ugrasena and said in sweet words (78–79).

Krishna said:—"It is time that has snatched away your two sons; I have
not slain them either for riches or for the kingdom of Mathurā (80), O
king of Mathura, having vanquished your enemies by the might of my arms
do you perform many sacrifices and make profuse presents (81). O king,
do you cast off your mental agony and fear consequent upon Kansa’s
death. I return you these riches; do you accept them" (82)

Having thus consoled the king, Krishna, along with Balarama, went to his
parents (83). There those two highly powerful heroes, with heart full of
joy, saluted their parents bending their heads (84). O Janamejaya, at
that time the city of Mathurā left off her own form and as if the
capital of gods came down there leaving the celestial region (85).
Beholding Vasudeva’s house the citizens did not consider it as earth but
took it for the region of the celestials (86). Having thus entered
Vasudeva’s house the heroic Baladeva and Keshava dismissed Ugrasena, the
king of Mathurā and his queen. And then leaving off their arms and
moving about for some time they went through the evening rites. And then
seated at ease they conversed with one another (87-88). In the meantime
there took place a highly dreadful calamity. The clouds were scattered
in the sky, the earth and the mountains were shaken, the oceans were
agitated, the serpents were terrified and the Yadavas, trembling, fell
down on earth (89–90). Beholding them thus fallen the immoveable Rāma
and Krishna, perceived, from the flapping of the huge wings, the
approach of Garuda, the foremost of birds. And within a short time they
saw Garuda by them. Saluting them both with his head, Vinatā’s son, of a
gentle form, adorned with celestial garlands and unguents, sat on a seat
(61–92). Observing the arrival of his war-like minister, the intelligent
son of Vinatā, the slayer of Madhu said: "O thou the grinder of the
enemies of the celestial army, O delight of Vinatā’s heart, O foremost
of birds, O favourite of Keshava, may thy arrival here prove auspicious"
(93–94). Having thus addressed Vinatā’s son, stationed there like a very
god Krishna again said to him who was equally powerful (95).

Krishna said:—O foremost of birds, let us now go to the highly extensive
inner appartment of the Bhoja king, for there, seated at ease we shall
be able to hold counsels after our own hearts (96).

Vaishampāyana said:—When having entered the inner appartment of the
Bhoja king along with Vinatā’s son, the highly powerful Krishna and
Baladeva held parley, the former said:—"O Vinatā’s son, the king
Jarāsandha is unslayable by us. It has been so ordained. Incomparable is
his might and he is encircled by a huge army and highly powerful kings.
The army of the Magadha king consists of many soldiers and so we shall
not be able to consume it even within hundred years. Therefore I tell
you, O king of birds, that it never bodes good for us to live in this
city of Mathura. Even it is my desire (97-100)".

Garuda said:—O god of gods, having saluted thee I took leave and went to
Kusathali for finding out a worthy habitation for thee (101), O foremost
of gods, having gone there and been stationed in the welkin I
reconnoitered all over that city endued with all auspicious marks (102).
That city is situate in an extensive watery province of the ocean. It
has the ocean on the east and is therefore always cool. It is surrounded
on all sides by the ocean, a mine of every sort of jem, spread with
trees conferring wished-for objects, covered on all sides with flowers
of all seasons and therefore highly charming; it is the abode of all
forms of _Ashramas_, satisfies every sort of desire, is filled with men
and women, is always full of merriment, is encircled by ditches and
walls, is embellished with palaces and gates, variegated courtyards and
roads, has huge doors and gates, and various bolts and other
contrivances, is adorned with a golden wall, is filled with
car-warriors, cavalry and infantry, and with trees of various countries
covered with celestial flowers and fruits, is adorned with flags and
pennons, contains big palaces, strikes terror to the enemies, enhances
the joy of the friends and is isolated from other cities presided over
by kings (103-109). O god, there is that best of mountains Raivata
resembling the garden of Nandana. Do thou make it an ornament of thy
gate (110). O foremost of gods, that city will also be liked by thy
sons. Do thou go and live there (111). Like unto Indra’s capital
Amarāvati thy city will be celebrated in the three worlds under the name
of Dwāravati (112). O god, if the great ocean gives there room covered
with water the celestial Architect will make works of art after his own
heart (113). O god, out of lustrous jewels, pearls, corals, diamonds,
sapphires and other jems produced in the three worlds, do thou have many
white palaces built there like unto the assembly hall of the celestials,
consisting of hundred heavenly pillars, adorned with all sorts of jewels
made of gold, decorated with celestial flags and pennons, guarded by
gods and Kinnaras and lighted by the sun and the moon (114-116).

Vaishampāyana said:—Having said this to Keshava and saluted them both
Vinatā’s son took his seat (117). Meditating on the words uttered by him
conducive to their well-being, and in order to give a proof of his
appreciation Krishna, with Rama, honored Garuda with presents of most
excellent and precious dresses and dismissed him. And then they enjoyed
there like two immortals in the city of the celestials (118-119). When
in time the highly illustrious Bhoja king heard of what Garuda had said
he affectionately addressed to Keshava the following nectarine words
(120).

He said:—O Krishna, O enhancer of the delight of the Yādavas, O thou of
large arms, O slayer of thy enemies, listen to what I say. O my son,
without thee, like unto a woman separated from her husband we shall not
be able to live happily either in this city of Mathurā or in any other
kingdom. O conferror of honor, even if Indra comes to the help of all
the kings, still we, under the protection of thy arms, do not fear them.
O foremost of Yadus, we shall proceed for accomplishing conquests
(121-124).

Hearing Ugrasena’s words Devaki’s son smilingly said: "O king, I am
ready to do whatever you wish. There is not the least doubt in it"
(125).