TITLE: JARASANDHA’S ADRESS TO THE KINGS

Vaishampayana said:—Beholding the eternal Krishna arrive there with
Vināta’s son the leading kings were stricken with great anxiety (1). O
king, those kings of dreadful prowess, well-read in the science of
Polity and expert in counsels, assembled at the golden assembly hall of
king Bhismaka for holding consultations. As the gods sit in the
celestial assembly hall so they sat there on seats variegated with
coverings of diverse colors (1-3). As the king of gods addressed the
celestials so the highly powerful Jarāsandha, of large arms and great
energy, addressed them saying (4).

"O ye foremost of kings, the best of speakers, O highly intelligent
Bhishmaka, do you all listen to what I say according to my own
understanding (5). This Krishna, the well known son of Vasudeva, who has
come to the city of Kundina with Garuda and other Yādavas, is endued
with great energy and prowess. He has come here for the maiden and
forsooth he will set forth mighty exertions for acquiring her (6-7). O
foremost of kings, you should behave in this matter according to the
rules of Polity. Do yo all work so considering your own strength and
weakness (8). You know well the highly dreadful work which these two
powerful sons of Vasudeva performed on the mount Gomanta without the
help of Vinatā’s son (9). I cannot say how Krishna will fight united
with the mighty car-warriors of the Yadava, Bhoja and Andhaka races
(10). When seated on Garuda Vishnu will set forth his exertions for
acquiring the maiden, even Sakra, assisted by the celestials, or any
other person, will not be able to stand in the battle-field (11). When
the universe was submerged under one all-spreading ocean, the powerful
Vishnu, the Prime cause of the world, assuming a boar form, released the
earth gone down to the depth of the nether region and in his same
boarish form killed Hiranyaksha the king of Daityas (12–13). The highly
powerful, uuconquerable Daitya-king, Hiranyakashipu, who did not meet
with his death in the three worlds, consisting of immortals, Daityas,
Rishis, Gandharvas, Kinnaras, Yakshas Rakshasas and Nāgas, in the sky,
on the earth, and in the nether region, in day or in night, from a dry
or an wet article, was slain in the days of yore by Hari in his man-lion
form (14–16). Binding the powerful Bali, the foremost of Asuras begotten
by Kagyapa on Aditi, with a noose of promise Vishnu, in his form of a
dwarf, sent him down to the nether region. When at the junction of the
Tretā and Dwāpara ages, the king of seven insular continents, the highly
powerful king Kārtavirya, endued with thousand arms, grew elated with
the pride of kingdom by Dattātreya’s favour the highly energetic Vishnu
took his birth in disguise, from Jamadagni and Renukā, as Rāma, the
foremost of warriors and killed him with his axe, hard as the
thunder-bolt (17–20). Dasharatha’s son Rāma, born in the race of Ikshāku
in the days of yore, killed the heroic Rāvana, the conqueror of the
three worlds (21). In the Tretā age in the war of which Tāraka was the
root, the powerful Vishnu, seated on Garuda, assuming a form of eight
arms, killed in the battle-field the Asuras, who were elated with the
boons conferred on them. By his great Yoga power, Vishnu, having an
universal form, killed, with his discus, effulgent like the sun, the
demon Kālanemi who terrorized the gods (22–24). What more, innumerable
Daityas have been despatched by him in time to the abode of Yama. By him
as a boy in the forest, many highly powerful and forest-ranging demons,
Dhenuka, Arishtha and Pralamva have been slain. Slaying in his cow-herd
form Shakuni, Putanā, Keshi, Jamala, Arjuna, the elephant Kuvalayapida,
Chānura, Mushitika and Kansa with his followers Devaki’s son sported
there. In disguise thus he performed many superhuman feats (25–28). I
consider Devaki’s son Keshava as the first cause of the celestials, the
destroyer of the Asuras, as Nārāyana, the ancient Purusha, the Prime
cause of the universe, as Truth, the creator of all creatures manifest
and unmanifest, irrepressible unto all, the adored of all, the first,
the middle, as devoid of destruction, eternal, self-born, unborn,
stable, mobile and immobile, unconquerable, of three foot-steps, the
lord of the three worlds, the destroyer of the enemies of the king of
gods, and the eternal Vishnu. This my sure under standing, I have
acquired from Mathurā (29–33). Can Garuda be the carrier of a man even
if he be born in the high family of a mortal Lord Paramount (34)?
Besides when Janarddana will display his prowess for the maiden what
powerful man will be able to stand before Garuda (35)? Forsooth I tell
you that Vishnu himself has come for this Swayamvara. Mighty is the
calamity that will befall you on his arrival here (36). You should do
whatever you think proper after this."

Vaishampāyana said:—After Jarāshandha, the king of Magadha, had said
this, the greatly wise Sunitha replied saying:

"What the mighty-armed king of Magadha has said, is true. In that great
battle on the mount Gomanta Krishna performed many feats, difficult of
accomplishment, before the kings (37–39). With the fire of their discus
and ploughshare the huge army, of the kings, consisting of elephants,
horses, cars, infantry and flags, was consumed (40). Remembering the
dreadful plight of the soldiers of the king and fearing their future
calamity the king of Magadha is saying this (41). Though Rāma and
Keshava fought on foot in battle still the soldiers of the kings were
terribly slaughtered and no body could prevent it (42). O foremost of
kings, you all remember that the sky-rangers were overwhelmed by the
wind raised by the flapping of the wings of Suparna when he came there
(43). The oceans were agitated and the earth and the mountains were
repeatedly shaken. We also were terrified thinking ’what is this
calamity (44)?’ When armed with his coat of mail, Keshava, seated on
Garuda, will engage in fight what man, like ourselves, will be able to
stand in the battle-field (45)? The prime kings laid down the practice
of holding Swayamvara ever increasing delight, the mine of piety and
fame unto the kings (46). Coming to this city of Kundina the kings will
no time combat with that great hero (47). If this princess selects any
one from amongst other kings what person will be able to stand the
strength of Krishna’s arms (48)? O kings, although a Swayamvara is a
matter of festivity, still it will give birth to a calamity and for this
Krishna and ourselves have met here (49). Therefore as the king of
Magadha has said, the arrival of Krishna here, for the maiden, bespeaks
of a calamity that is to befall the kings (50)".