TITLE: THE DESTRUCTION OF KHARA AND DHENUKA

Vaishampayana said:—After the king of serpents had been vanquished by
Krishna in the lake of Yamunā Rāma and Keshava began to range there (1).
Thereupon going to the mountain Govarddhana²¹⁴ along with their precious
kine, those two heroic sens of Vasudeva beheld a huge forest of palm
trees, situate, on its north, on the bank of Yamunā (2-3). They were
greatly delighted at its sight and began to range in that charming
forest of palm trees covered with palm leaves like two new grown plants
(4). It was well levelled, cool, coated with black earth and profuse
grass and was freed from stones and clods of earth. Dark-blue and tall
palm trees, with fruits and branches hanging, shone there like the
trunks of elephants (5–6).

While thus ranging Dāmodara, the foremost of speakers, said to
Sangkarshana:—"O reverend sir, this forest-land is perfumed with the
fragrance of ripe palm fruits. Let us both quickly pluck the sweet, ripe
and dark-blue fruits. While its smell is so very sweet and pleasing to
the odiferous organ it must undoubtedly be delicious like ambrosia. This
is (in short) my conviction (7–9)."

Hearing the words of Dāmodara, Rohini’s son smilingly shook the trees
with a view of felling down the fruits (10). Appearing like a desert,
although very useful, that forest of palm trees was unworthy of being
resorted to and traversed by men like a habitation of the Rākshasas
(11). For encircled by a herd of mules that huge and dreadful demon
Dhenuka used always to live there, in the shape of an ass (12).
Terrifying men, beasts and birds there that wicked minded ass used to
protect the forest of palm trees (13). Hearing the sound of the fall of
palm fruits he grew exceedingly enraged and could not bear it like unto
an elephant (14). Shaking his manes in anger, lifting up his tail in
delight and scratching the earth with his hoof that Daitya, of
motionless eyes and wide lips, followed the sound of palm fruits and
arrived where the son of Rohini was (15–16). Beholding under the palm
tree that immortal son of Rohini resembling a flag in form, that
Daitya-chief Khara, having the teeth for his weapon, all on a sudden bit
him; and then turning back his face he struck his breast with his long
legs (17–18) Then holding that demon in the shape of an ass by the legs
and whirling his head and shoulders (Sangkarshana) threw him up on the
top of the palm tree (16). He too, with his thighs, waist, neck and back
mutilated and a disfigured form, fell down on earth along with palm
fruits (20). Beholding that ass thus dead and shorn of beauty Baladeva
threw up his other relations too on the top of the tree (21). At that
time the ground there was covered with palm fruits and bodies of the
asses and it shone there like the autumnal sky covered with clouds (22).

Thus when that Daitya, in the form of an ass, was slain with all his
followers that forest of palm trees assumed again a picturesque view
(23). When that most excellent white forest of palm trees was shorn of
fear the kine began to range there with great glee (24). And entering
that forest the milkmen, rangers of woods, began to move about on all
sides divested of sorrow and fear (25). Observing the kine roam on all
sides at ease the two sons of Vasudeva, powerful like elephants, spread
there seats of grass and sat down at ease (26).

²¹⁴ There is still a mountain of the same name within a few miles’
 distance from the town of Mathura in N. W. P.