TITLE: BALADEVA’S MANTRA FOR PROTECTING PRADYUMNA

Vaishampāyana said:—O foremost of victors, after having slain Shamvara,
Pradyumna had arrived at the city of Dwārāka a wonderful evening Mantra
was recited. I am describing the evening Mantra which Baladeva recited
at that time for protecting Pradyumna. If one recites it in the evening
he has his soul purified. It has been recited by Baladeva, Vāsudeva, and
the pious ascetics and saints:–"May the Lord of the universe Brahmā, the
preceptor of the gods and Asuras, protect me. May _Om_, Vashatkar,
Savitri and the three regulations protect me. May the four Vedas,
Puranas, Itihāsas, Khilas, Upakhilas, the auxiliaries of the Vedas and
their commentaries protect me (1–3). May earth, air, ether, water,
light, the senses, mind, intellect, the gunas Sattwa, Raja, Tama, the
five vital airs, namely Vyāna, Udana, Samāna, Prāna, and Apāna and the
seven other airs which which pervade the universe protect me. May the
great Rishis, Marichi, Angira, Atri, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu Bhrigu and
the divine Vasistha protect me. May the fourteen Munis headed by
Kashyapa, and the Lord Nārāyana with ten quarters and Gunas protect me.
May the eleven Rudras, the twelve Adityās, the eight Vasus and the two
Ashwinis protect me. May the mothers of the Daityas, Hri, Shree,
Lakshmi, Swadhā, Medhā, Tushthi, Pushthi Smriti, Dhriti, Aditi, Diti,
Danu, and Sinhikā protect me. May the mountains Himāvan, Hemkuta,
Nishadha, Sweta, Rishabha, Paripatra, Vindhya, Vaidurya, Sahya, Udaya,
Malaya, Meru, Mandara, Dardura, Krouncha, Kailāsha, and Maināka protect
me (9-16). May the Nāgas, Shesha, Vasuki, Vishalāksha, Takshaka,
Elapatrā, Suktikarna, Kamvala, Aswatara, Hastibhadra, Pitharaka,
Karkotaka, Dhananjaya, Puranaka, Karavira, Sumanasya, Dadhimuka,
Sringārapinda the Lord Mani known all over three worlds, the Nāga kings
Dadhikarma and Haridraka all those Nagas and others whose names have not
been mentioned—all those who are truthful and upholding the universe,
protect me. May the four oceans protect me. May the river Ganga, the
foremost of streams, Saraswati, Chandrabhaga, Shatadru, Devikā, Shivā,
Iravati, Vipasha, Sarayu, Yamunā, Kalmashi, Rathoshmā, Vahinda,
Hiranyadā, Plakshmā, Ikshumati, Shravanti, Vrihavrathā, and the
celebrated Charmanvati and the sacred Vadhusara, and those whose names
have not been mentioned flowing in the north sprinkle me with their
water. May Venva, Godāvari, Kaveri, Kongkanāvati, Krishnā, Venva,
Shuktimati, Tamasa, Pushpavahimi, Tamraparni, Jyotiratha, Utkala, Udum
varāvati, Vaitarani, the sacred Vidarbha, Narmudā, Vitasta, Bhimarathi,
Mahānandi, Elā, Kahini, Gomati and Shoma and all those whose names have
not been mentioned flowing in the south sprinkle me with their water.
May Kshiprā, the sacred Charmanvavati, Mahi, Shuvravati, Sindhu,
Vetravati, Bhojanta, Vanamahkā, Purvabhadrā, Aparābhadrā, Urmita,
Varadrumā, Vetravati, the well-known Chapadangi, Luthā, the sacred and
charming Saraswati, Mitraghni, Indumāla, Madhumati, Umā, Garunar, Tapi,
Vimalodaka, Vimalā, Vimalodā, Mattagangā, and Payaswani and all those
whose names have not been mentioned here as well as the sacred
Bhāgirathi flowing in the west sprinkle me with water (17-34). May the
sacred lakes Prabhāsa, Prayaga, Naimisha, Pushkara, Gangā, Kurukshetra,
Shrikshetra, Goutamashrama, Ramhrada, Vināshana, Rāmatirtha, Gangādwāra
where Soma rose up, Kapālamochana, the well-known Suvarnadindu,
Kanakapingala, Dashāswameda, the Naranarayanshrama, the celebrated
Vadari, the well-known Phalgu, Chandravata, Kokāmukha, the sacred
Gangāsāgara, Tapoda of the Magadha country, the well-known Gangobheda,
and those whose names have not been mentioned where the great Rishis
live, sprinkle us with their sacred water. May the shrines of Shukara,
Yogamārga, Shwetadwipa, Brahmatirtha, Rāmatirtha, Dashāshwamedha, the
sin-destroying Gangā with her streams, Vaikuntha-like Kedara,
Shukarodvedana and Pāpamochana destroy my sins and purify me. May
Dharma, Artha, Kāma, fame, Prapti, Shama, Dama, Varuna, Kuvera, Yama,
Niyama, Kāla, Naya, Sannati, anger, stupefaction, forgiveness, patience,
lightning, clouds, herbs, planets, Yakshas, Pishachas, Gandharvas,
Kinnaras, Siddhas, Chāranas, night-rangers, sky-rangers, beasts,
auspicious planets, Lamvodara, Bali, Pingaksha, Vishwarupa, Indra with
airs, Kalā, Truti, Lava. Kshanā and other divisions of time, stars,
planets, seasons, months, days, nights, the sun, moon, sorrow, fear and
sentiments, pride, truth, Sidhi, Vridhi, Sruti, Dhriti, Rudrāni,
Bhadrakāli, Bhadra-Yasthi, Vāruni, Bhāsi, Kalikā, Shandili, Kuhu,
Sinivali, Bhima, Chitravati, Rati, Kātyāyani, Sohitya, Ayanamitra,
Ganada and other celestial damsels, spoken of, protect me with their
friends (35-52)".