TITLE: AN ACCOUNT OF PURURAVA

Vaishampayana said:—O great king, Budha’s son Pururava was learned,
energetic, and charitably disposed. He performed many sacrifices and
gave away many presents (1). He was conversant with the knowledge of
Brahman and powerful and the enemies could not defeat him in battle.
That king kept up perpetual fire in his house and celebrated many
sacrifices (2). He was truthful, pious and highly handsome. He had an
entire control over his sexual appetites. At that time there was none in
the three worlds equal to him in glory (3). Having cast off her pride
the illustrious Urvashi selected, as her lord, that forgiving and pious
king conversant with the knowledge of Brahman (4). O descendant of
Bharata, the king Pururava lived with Urvashi at the charming
Chaitraratha garden for ten years, on the banks of the river Mandākini
for five years, in the city of Alakā for five years, in the forest of
Vadari for six, in the best of gardens Nandana for seven, in the
province of Uttara kuru where the trees bear fruits whenever desired for
eight, at the foot of the mount Gāndhamādana for ten and on the summit
of the North Sumeru for eight years (5–7). In these most beautiful
gardens resorted to by the gods the king Pururava sported most
delightedly with Urvashi (8). That king ruled over the sacred province
of Prāyaga, so highly spoken of by the great Rishis (9). His seven sons
were all high-souled and like the sons of the gods born in the celestial
region. They were named Ayu, Dhiman, Amavasu, the pious-souled Vishvāyu,
Shrutayu, Dridayu, Valāyu and Shatāyu. They were all given birth to by
Urvashi (10-11).

Janamejaya said:—O you well-read in various Srutis, why did Urvashi, who
was an Apsara, leave aside the gods and come to a human king? Do you
relate this to me (12).

Vaishampāyana said:—Having been imprecated with a curse by Brahmā and
abiding by the time the most beautiful Urvashi came to a man, the son of
Ilā (13). In order to free herself from the curse Urvashi made a
contract with the king saying "O king, I shall not see you naked and you
should associate with me whenever you will find me filled with desire
(14). Two lambs should always be kept near my bed and you should always
live on a small quantity of clarified butter during the day (15). O
king, if you satisfy this contract and as long as you will remain true
to it so long I shall live with you. This is our contract (16)." The
king satisfied all her conditions. Thus under the influence of a curse,
that damsel, out of reverence towards Pururavā, lived with him at the
above-mentioned places for fifty-nine years. On account of Urvashi’s
living with a man all the Gandharvas were filled with anxiety (17). The
Gandharvas said:—"O you great ones, concert some measure, by which that
best of damsels Urvashi, the ornament of the celestial region, may come
back to the gods" (19). Amongst them a Gandharva by name Viswāvasu, the
foremost of speakers said:—"I heard them when they entered into the
contract (20). As soon as the king will violate that contract Urvashi
will forsake him. I know full well how that king will be divorced from
Urvashi (21). I shall therefore depart with a companion for
accomplishing your work." Having said this the highly illustrious
(Gandharva) repaired to the city of Pratisthāna (22). Having reached
there during the night he pilfered away a lamb. That damsel, of
beautiful smiles, was like a mother to that pair of lambs (23). Hearing
of the arrival of the Gandharva and understanding that the hour of the
termination of the curse had come, that illustrious (damsel) said to the
king, "Who has stolen away one of my sons" (24)? Although thus accosted
by her he did not get up for he was naked, thinking "If the goddess
beholds me without any raiment on then the terms of our contract will be
cancelled" (25).

Thereupon the Gandharvas again stole away the other lamb. When the
second was carried away the damsel said to the son of Ilā (26). "O king,
O lord, who is stealing away my sons as if I have none to look after
me?" Thus addressed the king, although he had no cloth on, ran away in
search of the lambs. In the meantime the Gandharvas created lightnings.
When the king was going out of the place lighted up by lightnings she,
all on a sudden, saw him naked. Beholding him thus without any cloth on
that Apsarā, coursing at her will, went away (27–29). Beholding the pair
of lambs left there the king took them and came to his house. (On his
return), he did not see Urvashi and greatly stricken with grief began to
bewail (30). He travelled over the entire earth in search of her. Then
the highly powerful king saw her bathing at a tank called Haimavati at
the sacred shrine of Plaksha in the province of Kurukshetra. That
beautiful damsel was sporting with five other Apsarās (31–32). Beholding
her thus sport the king, filled with mighty sorrow, began to bewail.
Seeing the king at a distance Urvashi too said to her companions. "This
is the foremost of men with whom I lived for some time." Saying this she
pointed out the king to them (33–34). O king, the Apsaras then grew
anxious lest she might go back. The king then addressed her in sweet
words saying:—"O cruel lady, you may show yourself cruel in words but
remain my wife at heart." Urvashi then said to the son of Ilā, "O lord,
through you I have become _enciente_. Forsooth within a year all your
sons will be born. O king live with me for one night more" (35–37).
Hearing this the highly illustrious king was pleased and returned to his
own city. After the expiration of a year Urvashi again came to him (38).
The highly illustrious king lived with her for one night. Thereupon
Urvashi said to the son of Ila:—"The Gandharvas will confer a boon on
you (39). O king, beg of them a boon and tell them that you want equal
beauty with the high-souled Gandharvas" (40). Then the king prayed for a
boon from the Gandharvas and they too said "so be it." Thereupon filling
a bag with fire the Gandharvas said to him (41):—"O king, having
celebrated a Yajna with this fire you will attain to our region."
Thereupon taking the princes with him the king left for his city (42).
Having thrown away that fire into the forest the king, with his sons,
went to his own city. He did not see there the _Treta_ fire⁵⁴ but only
saw a fig tree (43). Beholding that fig tree of Sami species he was
stricken with surprise. He then communicated to the Gandharvas the
destruction of fire (44). Hearing the whole story they ordered for a
piece of wood to enkindle it. Then taking a piece of wood from the fig
tree, churning the fire duly and worshipping the gods with various
_Yajnas_ there with, he attained the region of the Gandharvas (45–46).
Having obtained the boon from the Gandharvas he placed _Treta_ fire. The
fire was at first one. The son of Ilā divided it into three (47). So
powerful was that foremost of men the royal son of Ilā. The greatly
illustrious king Pururavā reigned in the city of Pratishthāna situate on
the northern bank of the Ganges in the Province of Prayāga, so highly
spoken of by the Rishis (48-49).

⁵⁴ The three sacred fires collectively or the southern, household and
 sacrificial fires.