TITLE: ARRANGEMENTS FOR THE MATCH

Vaishampayana said:—Meditating on the incident of the breaking of the
bow Kansa, of Bhoja race, was greatly stricken with grief and
absent-mindedness (1). He began to think:—"How could a boy fearlessly
break down an iron bow guarded by men and go out (2). None can withstand
destiny by manliness for now, as predicted by Nārada, that has come to
pass for which out of fear I perpetrated a dreadful and highly
censurable deed and destroyed the six heroic sons of Devaki" (3-4).

Thus thinking and issuing out of his own apartment the king went to the
arena for examining the platforms (5). This hall was constructed by
clever artizans, abounded in well fixed platforms and was adorned with
turrets consisting of beautiful rooms. It had a spacious courtyard and a
number of pillars of the same size. It was bedecked on all sides with
strong tusks of elephants and with spacious, high and royal seats. It
had many passages, could carry the burden of many men and was filled
with altars. Beholding this spacious well-built, and strong arena that
intelligent best of kings issued the mandate "(tomorrow) the bow
sacrifice will take place. Let the platforms, turrets and passages be
embellished with garlands, flags and covers and be sweet-scented (6-11).
Let the enclosures be adorned with bells, covers and becoming edibles
and place there profuse cow-dung (12). Let excellent golden jars full of
water be placed in due order (13). Let jars full of edibles and scents
be placed and invite all those who are clever judges of warfare and the
citizens (14). Issue my mandate to the wrestlers and visitors and let
beautifully decked and enclosed platforms be set apart (15)." Issuing
this command regarding the arrangement of the party Kansa left the arena
for his own appartment (16).

Having entered his own room Kansa sent for Chānura and Mushthika the two
wrestlers of unequalled strength (17). Following Kansa’s order those two
highly powerful energetic and large armed wrestlers entered his room
with a delighted heart (18). Beholding those two world-renowned
wrestlers before him king Kansa addressed to them the following words
pregnant with propriety (19). "You are both my heroic wrestlers
well-known (in the world). You are worthy particularly of good treatment
and therefore I always regard you (20). If you remember the honors I
have showered upon you then engage in a great work with your energy on
my behalf (21). Forsooth, fighting in the arena with those two
forest-ranging cow-herd boys Krishna and Sangkarshana who have grown in
Vraja for me you will be able to throw them on earth and kill them
(22–23). You will be perfectly careful in killing them; do not disregard
them as boys of fickle nature (24). If those two boys are killed in
battle in the arena I shall meet with well-being both in present and
future (25)."

Hearing these affectionate words of the king the wrestlers Chānura and
Mushthika, mad after fight, delightedly replied (26):—"If those two
helpless boys, the very sin of the Gopas, come before us know them as
already slain and existing in the shape of ghosts (27). On our being
worked up with anger if those two forest-rangers, enveloped in
calamities, withstand us, we will destroy them in your very presence
(28)." Giving vent to these poisonous words and commanded by king Kansa
those two foremost of wrestlers Chānura and Mushthika returned to their
own habitations (29).

Thereupon Kansa said to his elephant-trainer Mahāmātra:—"Keep at the
gate of the arena the fickle-natured and powerful elephant Kuvalayapida,
the oppressor of other elephants, whose temples are soaked with temporal
juice, eyes are always inebriate and who is always angry with men
(30–31). When the mean forest-ranging sons, of Vasudeva, will come do
you so drive that elephant at them that they might at once be deprived
of their lives (32). If by you, through that elephant-chief those two
irrepressible Gopas are killed in the arena my eyes will derive pleasure
from seeing you (33). Beholding them slain, Vasudeva, with his root cut
off and helpless, will meet with destruction along with his wife (34).
Beholding Krishna thrown down all the stupid Yādavas will give up hope
and be slain (35). Having myself slain those two cow-herd boys through
the wrestlers or the elephant I shall divest the city of Mathurā of all
the Yādavas and live here happily (36). I have forsaken my father
because he belongs to the Yadu race and I do now forsake the remaining
Yādavas devoted to Krishna (37). Verily as said by Nārada I am not
begotten by Ugrasena a man of feeble energy who hankers after a son
(38)."

Mahamatra said:—"How did the celestial saint Nārada describe the
wonderful story related by thee, O king, O thou, the slayer of thy
enemies (39). O king, how couldst thou take thy birth from any other
person save thy father Ugrasena? How could thy mother perpetrate such an
abominable deed which even the ordinary women cannot? O great king,
curious I am to listen to all these in detail (40—41)."

Kansa said:—Hear, if you are so anxious, I shall describe what the
powerful sage Nārada, the foremost of Brāhmanas said (42). Once on a
time came to me from Indra’s palace his friend the immortal, learned and
celestial sage Nārada. He was clad in an apparel white as the rays of
the moon, wore matted locks, had an antelope skin thrown round his neck,
a rough sacred thread, a staff and a pitcher in his hands. He used to
recite the four Vedas, was proficient in the art of music and traversed
the Brahma region like his second-self (43–45). Beholding the arrival of
the sage and adoring him duly with _arghya_, water to wash his feet and
a seat I took him to my house and made him seated (46). Seated at ease
that foremost of divine sages Nārada, always intent on meditating upon
soul, enquired after my well-being and said with a delighted mind (47).

Narada said:—"O hero, I have been worshipped by you with rites
sanctioned by Holy Writs. Listen now to a word of mine and accept it
(48). I had repaired to the golden mountain Meru, the abode of the gods.
On the summit of that mountain Sumeru a meeting of the gods was held. I
heard them hold counsels regarding the highly dreadful destruction of
yourself along with all your followers (49-50). I heard there, that the
eighth son of Devaki, Vishnu, worshipped of all, would bring about
Kansa’s death (51). He is all in all of the gods, the support of the
celestial region, the great mystery of the gods. He will be your Death
(52). O king, one should not disregard his enemy, even he may be weak or
his own kinsman. Be careful to put Devaki’s children to death (53). O
you of great power, Ugrasena is not your father. The energetic and
dreadful Drumila, the king of Soubha,²⁶¹ is your father (54)." Hearing
his words I was filled with anger a little and accosted him again saying
"O Brahman, how could Dānava Drumila become my father (55)? How could he
know my mother, O Vipra? I wish to hear all this at length, O great
ascetic (56)."

Narada said:—"O king, listen, I shall truly relate how your mother was
united with Drumila (57). Once on a time your mother, during her menses,
went out of curiosity to see the mountain Suyāman along with her female
companions. She was ranging in the beautiful summits of the mountain
abounding in charming trees and table-lands, and in the caves and on the
banks of the rivers (58–59). Hearing again and again the lust-exciting
words, sweet as the songs of the Kinnaras, pleasant to the ears; and
echoing on all sides, the notes of the peacocks and other birds her mind
was worked up with desire the usual habit of women (60–61). In the
meantime there blew the wind carrying the fragrance of flowers of the
forest that awakes Manmatha (the god of love) (62). Driven by the wind
the Kadamva flowers, closed by continual showers and adorned with black
bees, began to pour down fragrance profusely (63). With the downpour of
flowers and filaments the Neepa trees shone there like lamps (64).
Covered with new grass and adorned with Indragopa insects the earth
appeared to have her menstrual flow, like a youthful damsel (65). At
that time, O Kansa, as if you urged on by destiny the beautiful Dānava
Drumila, capable of coursing at-will, the king of Soubha, came there by
the etherial way in a quick-coursing car, going everywhere at will, and
effulgent like the new sun, to see mount Suyāmana. Reaching that
foremost of mountains, descending from his car, and keeping his chariot,
that is capable of destroying other cars, in the garden on the mountain
he began to walk on the summit along with his charioteer (66–69). They
saw there many forests and gardens endued with characteristics of
various seasons and resembling the celestial garden of Nandana, various
jewels of golden, silvery and collyrium-like hues, summits covered with
diverse mineral substances, various trees adorned with many sorts of
fruits and flowers, filled with the fragrance of flowers and resorted to
by various creatures and birds of diverse species, various places
abounding in herbs and Rishis of accomplished piety, numberless
Vidyadharas, Kimpurushas, Vānaras, Rakshasas, lions, tigers, boars,
buffaloes, Sarabhas, Shalas, Srimaras, Mahasatwas, elephants and Yakshas
as they walked over that best of mountains (70-75).

"Thereupon from distance Drumila, the king of Daityas, saw your mother,
as if the daughter of a god, culling flowers from the trees and sporting
with her companions (76). Beholding from a distance that goddess of a
beautiful hip encircled by her companions the king of Soubha, filled
with surprise, said to his charioteer (77).

"’Who is this beautiful, high-minded and accomplished damsel having the
eyes of a roe who is ranging at the outskirt of the forest? (78). Is she
Madana’s Rati, Indra’s Sachi or Tilottamā? Or is she Aila’s daughter
Urvashi, the jem of a woman who came out riving the thighs of Nārāyana
(79)? When converting the mount Mandāra into a churning rod the gods and
Asuras, unitedly, churned the ocean of milk for ambrosia the goddess
Sree, the root of the world, arose therefrom and adorned the lap of
Nārāyana. Is she the beautiful Sree (80–81)? Who is she, who, walking in
the midst of that bevy of ladies, is lighting up the forest with her
beauty like into a lightning, attached to dark clouds, shining up all
the quarters (82). I am beside myself at seeing this highly beautiful
damsel of defect-less limbs and moon-like countenance and all my senses
have become agitated (83). My mind is highly worked up with lust. The
holder of the flowery bow²⁶² is wounding greatly my body with flowery
shafts (84). Like a ruthless wight he is cutting my heart and consuming
it with five arrows and my lust is increasing like fire sprinkled with
clarified butter. What work shall I undertake to-day to pacify this fire
of lust (85)? On undertaking what will this beautiful damsel worship
me?’

"Thinking thus for a long time Dānava Drumila could not attain to
patience and again said to his charioteer:—’Wait here for a moment, O
sinless one. I shall myself go and see whose wife she is (86–87).
Therefore wait here till my return.’ Hearing his words the charioteer
said ’So be it (88).’

"Saying this to his charioteer and rinsing his mouth that powerful king
of Dānavas, bent on going there, engaged in meditation and thought (89).
Meditating for a moment he, by this knowledge, came to know that she was
Ugrasena’s wife and was highly pleased (90). Changing his form and
assuming that of Ugrasena that large-armed king of Dānavas proceeded
smilingly (91). O Kansa, thus proceeding gradually with smiles in his
Ugrasena form that powerful (Dānava) caught hold of your mother and
ravished her (92), On account of her exuberance of feelings that lady,
devoted heart and soul to her husband, was united with her. Then
perceiving the heaviness of his touch, she was filled with fear (93).
Then rising up and terrified she said to him:—’Forsooth thou art not my
husband. Who art thou that hast polluted me with thy impure conduct
(94). By thee of mean habits, assuming the form of my husband, my vow,
of devotion to one husband, has been spoliated (95). Alas, being enraged
with me what will my kinsmen say to me who have brought disgrace on my
family. And forsaken and censured by my husband’s relatives where shall
I live (96)? O thou born in a degraded race, thou art passionate and
shorn of patience. Fie on thee! While thou hast begun to ravish other’s
wives, thou art not worthy of confidence and your lease of life has run
out (97).’

"While the lady thus remonstrated with him that Dānava, filled with
anger, said:—’I am Drumila, the king Soubha (98). O stupid woman
vaunting of learning, being under the protection of a human husband
subject to mean death, why art thou censuring me (99). O thou proud of
thy womanly honour, eternal is not the understanding of a woman and
therefore they are not (by coming in contact with a person like myself)
visited by the sin of incontinence²⁶³ (100). I have heard that by going
astray many women have given birth to sons of unlimited prowess like
unto the gods (101). Thou art a most chaste and devoted wife amongst
women, and therefore art remonstrating with me, although I am sinless,
and saying whatever thou dost like (102). O excellent woman, because
thou hast addressed me as _Kastham_ (who art thou) therefore thou shalt
give birth to a son by name Kansa the destroyer of his enemies (103).’

"Hearing these words the queen was filled with anger and speaking ill of
his boon she again, with a heart aching, said to that impudent Dānava
(104). ’Fie on thy conduct, O highly wicked one. Thou art speaking
against all women. But there are many amongst them who are chaste and
many who are unchaste (105). O wretch of thy race, by Arundhati and
other chaste ladies, of whom we hear, all these creatures and worlds are
being upheld (106). I do not like the son that thou, hast given me—the
destroyer of my vow. Hear what I say about it (107). O vile creature,
the eternal Purusha, who will be born in the family of my husband, will
be the destroyer of thyself and of the son given by thee (108).’

"Thus addressed and ascending the most excellent car of unobstructed
course Drumila went away by the etherial way (109). And on that very day
your mother too went to her city with a poor heart."

Having said this to me the divine Nārada, the foremost of sages burning
in his ascetic energy like the very fire, playing on his flute of seven
notes and singing, set out for the Brahma region to meet the
Grand-Father. O Mahāmātra, you have listened to the words given vent to
by me (110-112), Truth has been spoken out by the intelligent Nārada
conversant with the knowledge of present, past and future. In strength,
energy, humility, stature, heroism, manliness, truth, and liberality no
man is like me (113-114). Seeing all these (accomplishments) in me I
placed confidence in his words. O elephant-trainer, I am a Kshetraja²⁶⁴
son of Ugrasena (115). If both my parents forsake, I shall be on the
royal throne by my own power. I have been hated by them both and
especially by my kinsmen (116). Having slain, through the elephant,
first these two sinful cowherd boys I shall afterwards kill all the
Yādavas belonging to Krishua’s party (117). Riding your elephant with
goads, swords and Tomaras, do you wait, O Mahāmātra, at the gate of the
arena. Do not tarry (118).

²⁶¹ The city of Harishchandra suspended in mid-air.

²⁶² This refers to Madana (Cupid). He is represented to carry a
 flowery bow and flowery shafts.

²⁶³ The purport is that women are mortal and so by living with
 immortals on immoral terms they commit no sin as they do when they
 mix with men.

²⁶⁴ Lit: produced in a field, born of the wife. A son, the offspring
 of the wife by a kinsman or person duly appointed to procreate
 issue to the husband. This is one of the twelve kinds of issue
 acknowledged by the old Hindu Law.