TITLE: AN ACCOUNT OF VARIOUS FAMILIES; DAKSHA’S OFFSPRING

Janamejaya said:—O Vaishampāyana, do thou describe at length the origin
of the gods, Dānavas, Gandharvas, serpents and Rakshasas (1).

Vaishampāyana said:—O king, hear how Daksha created progeny when he was
commanded by Swayambhuva, saying "create progeny." (2) The capable
Daksha first created his mental offspring—the Rishis, gods, Gandharvas,
Asuras, Rākshasas, Yakshas, goblins, Pishāchas, beasts, birds, and
reptiles (3). When this his mind-born creation did not multiply, for
such was the thought of the intelligent Mahādeva, the Patriarch,
thinking again of the multiplication of his creation and desirous of
creating progeny by sexual intercourse, married Asniki, the daughter of
the Patriarch Virana, engaged in a penance for a son and capable of
giving birth to a great race (4–6). Thereupon the energetic Patriarch
Daksha begat five thousand sons on Asniki, the daughter of Virana (7).
Beholding those great men desirous of multiplying progeny, the celestial
saint Nārada, ever fond of carrying news, for their destruction and for
his own imprecation, said (8). Afraid of Daksha and his imprecation the
ascetic Kaçyapa begat on his daughter the same celestial saint Nārada
who had been begotten by Brahmā (9). Nārada was formerly begotten by
Brahmā; and then that foremost of celestial saints (Kaçyapa) again begat
that best of ascetics on Asniki, daughter of Virana (10). Undoubtedly by
him the sons of Daksha, celebrated under the name of Haryaswas were
freed from attachment to body through scriptural knowledge and rendered
invisible (11). When Daksha, of immeasurable prowess, was ready to
destroy Nārada, Parameshti (Brahmā), with leading saints before him,
begged him (not to do it) (12). Thereupon Daksha made this contract with
Parameshti that his son Nārada would be born as the son of his
(Daksha’s) daughter (13). Thereupon Daksha gave away his daughter unto
Parameshti: and the Rishi, in fear of the imprecation of Daksha, begat
Nārada on her (14).

Janamejaya said:—O foremost of the twice-born, I wish to hear truly why
Daksha’s sons were killed by the great saint Nārada (15).

Vaishampāyana said:—When the highly energetic sons of Daksha called
Haryaswas came there with a view to multiply the progeny Nārada said to
them (19), "O ye sons of Daksha, how stupid you are all, since you do
not know the cause of all and still desire to create progeny; with out
knowing him who is in heaven, earth and nether region how do you wish to
create progeny?" (17) Hearing his words those descendants of Daksha,
without caring for each other, repaired to various directions to see the
cause of all (18). Having restrained vital airs, and attained to the
pure Brahman they secured emancipation. Even now they have not returned
like the rivers from the ocean (19). When the Haryaswas were thus lost
sight of, Daksha, the son of Prachetas, capable of creating progeny,
again begat one thousand sons on the daughter of Virana (20). When those
Shavalashwas were again desirous of multiplying progeny they were
addressed by Narada with the self-same words (21). They then spoke
amongst themselves, "The great saint Nārada has spoken the just thing.
We should follow the footsteps of our brothers; there is no doubt about
that (22). Learning the dimension of the earth, we will, at ease and
with whole minded attention, create progeny in due order (23)". They, by
the same way, repaired to various directions. Even now they have not
returned like the rivers from the ocean (24). When the Shavalāshwas too
were lost sight of, Daksha, possessed by anger, said to Nārada:—"Do thou
meet with destruction and experience the pain of living in the womb
(25)". Since then, O king, if a brother issues out in quest of another
he meets with destruction. So the learned should not do it (26). Knowing
his sons thus exiled and destroyed the Patriarch Daksha again begat
sixty daughters on the daughter of Virana. This we have heard (27). O
descendant of Kuru, the Patriarch Kaçyapa, the Moon, Dharma and other
Rishis took their wives from among those daughters of Daksha (28). Of
them Daksha conferred ten on Dharma, thirteen on Kaçyapa, twenty seven
on the Moon, four on Arishtanemi, two on Vahuputra, two on Angiras and
two on the learned Krisāshwa. Hear from me their names (29–30).
Arundhuti, Vasu, Yami, Lamvā, Bhānu, Marutvati, Sankalpa Muhurta, Sādhyā
and Vishwā, these ten, O descendant of Bharata, were the wives of
Dharma. Hear from me of their offspring (31). Vishwadevas were the sons
of Vishwā and Sādhyā gave birth to Sādhyas. Marutvati was the mother of
Maruts and Vāsus were the sons of Vasu (32). Bhānus were the sons of
Bhānu and the Muhurttas of Muhurtta (33). Gosha was born of Lamvā and
Nāgavithi of Yami. Arundhuti gave birth to all the herbs of the earth
(34). The Deity of determination, the soul of all, took his birth from
Sankalpa and Vrihalamva took his birth from Nāgabitha (35). O king, all
the daughters, whom Daksha conferred on the Moon, have been celebrated
by the name of _Nakshatras_ or _planets_ in astrology (36). The
celestials, who have profuse effulgence before them, were celebrated by
the name of eight Vasus. I will mention their names at length (37). Apa,
Dhruva, Soma, Dhara, Anila, Anala, Pratyusha, and Pravasha—these eight
are known as eight Vasus (38), Apa’s sons were Vaitandya, Srānta and
Muni. Dhruva’s son was the Divine Kāla, the destroyer of creatures (39).
Soma’s son was the Divine Varchas who begat Varcaaswi. Dhara’s son was
Dravina the carrier of sacrificial oblations. He begat on his wife
Manoharā, Sishira, Prāna and Ramana (40). Anila’s wife was Shivā whose
son was Manojava. Anila, whose course is not known, had two sons (41).
Agni’s son Kumara shone in the thickets of Sara grass. His names are
Shakha, Vishakha, Naigameya and Prishthaja (42). And on account of his
being an offspring of Kirtikās⁹ he was called Kartikeya: With the fourth
part of his energy Agni created Skanda and Sanat Kumar (43).

Pratyusha’s son was the Rishi Devala whose two sons were forgiving and
observant of hard austerities (44). Shorn of attachment Vrihaspati’s
sister, the beautiful Yogasiddhā, who led a life of celibacy, ranged all
over the earth (45). She became the wife of the eighth Vasu Prabhasa.
The noble Patriarch Vishwakarma was born of her (46). He made chariots
for the celestials, was their architect, the maker of thousands of fine
things and dresses and the foremost of artizans. Adopting his art as
their profession mankind are now making their livelihoods (47-48). By
the grace of Siva and having her heart purified by virtue of asceticism,
Surabhi gave birth, through Kaçyapa, to the eleventh Rudra (49). O
descendant of Bharata, Ajaikapāt, Ahir-Budhna, Rudrashwa, Tasta, Srimān
and Vishwarupa, those were the highly illustrious sons of Tastu (50).
Hara, Vahurupa, Tryamvaka, Aparājita, Vrishākapi, Sambhu, Kapardi,
Raivata, Mrigavyadha, Sarpa and Kapāli—these are known as the eleven
Rudras who lord over the three worlds (51-52). O foremost of Bhāratas,
in Purānas, hundreds, of such Rudras of incomparable energy, have been
mentioned who have spread over the mobile and immobile creation (53). O
foremost of Bhāratas, hear from me of the wives of Kaçyapa who have
spread over all the worlds: They are Aditi, Diti, Dana, Aristha, Suravā,
Surabhi, Vinatā, Tāmrā, Krodhavashā, Irā, Kadru, Muni and Swasā; hear
now of their offspring (54-55). In the previous Manwantara they were
twelve leading celestials. In the Manwantara of Vaivaswata they used to
address one another by the name of Tushita (56). During the reign of the
present highly illustrious Manu Chakshusha, they all assembled together
for the benefit of all creatures and said (57). "Let us all enter into
the womb of Aditi to be born in the Manwantara of Vaivaswata and we will
attain well-being (58)".

Vaishampāyana said:—Having said this during the Manwantara of Manu
Chakshusha, they were begotten on Aditi, daughter of Daksha by Kagyapa
the son of Marichi (59). Sakra and Vishnu were also born of her.
Besides, O descendant of Bharata, Aryamā, Dhātā, Twastā, Pushā,
Vivashmān, Savitā, Mitra, Varuna, Ansha, and the highly effulgent
Bhaga—these eight were also born of Aditi; so it is said (60-61). Those
who passed by the name of _Tushita_ during the Manwantara of Chakshusha
were known as twelve Adityas during the Manwantara of Vaivaswata (62).
The twenty seven wives of Soma, observant of vows and of incomparable
energy, gave birth to luminous bodies as their offspring (63).
Arishthanemi’s wives had sixteen sons. The learned Patriarch Vahuputra
had four sons:—Vidyut (lightning), Açani (thunder-bolt), Megha (cloud)
and Indradhanu (rain-bow) (64). The best of works _Riks_ originated from
Pratyangiras and the celestial saint Krishāswa begat deities presiding
over various celestial weapons (65).

O child, these deities take their births again after a thousand Yugas.
Of them thirty three¹⁰ take birth of their own accord (66). As in this
world the sun rises and sets, so O king, the origin and disappearance of
all these gods are also mentioned. They appear and disappear at every
Yuga (67-68).

Kaçyapa begat on Diti two sons, the powerful Hiranyakashipu and
Hiranyaksha. This we have heard (69). He had a daughter (also) by name
Sinhikā whom Viprachitti espoused. Her highly powerful sons were
celebrated by the name of Saihinkeyas. It is said, O king, that their
number was ten thousand (70). They had, O thou having mighty arms,
hundreds and thousands of sons and grandsons. Hear now from me of the
children of Hiranykashipu (71). He had four sons of well-known
prowess—Anurhāda, Hrāda, and the energetic Pralhāda (72). And Sanghrāda
was the fourth. Hrāda’s son was Hrada. Sangrada’s sons were Sunda and
Nisunda (73). Anurahada’s sons were Ayu, Sivi and Kāla. Virochana was
Pralhada’s son; and his son was Vali (74). O king, Vali had a hundred
sons, of whom Vāna was the eldest. Dhritarashtra, Surya, Chandramā,
Indratapana, Kumbhanabha, Gardhabhaksha, Kukshi and others were their
names. Of them Vāna was the eldest, powerful and a beloved votary of
Paçupati (75–76). In the previous Kalpa, Vāna, having propitiated the
Divine Lord of Uma, prayed to him for the boon "I shall remain by your
side." (77). Vāna begat on his wife Lohita, a son, by name Indradamana.
Hundreds and thousands of Asuras yielded to his power (78). The five
sons of Hiranyaksha were learned and highly powerful—they were Jarjara,
Sakuni, Bhutasantāpana, the powerful Mahānābha and Kālanabha. Hundred
sons of dreadful prowess were born to Danu. They were all ascetic and
endued with great energy. Hear their names in order of precedence
(79–80). Dwimurdhā, Shakuni, Shankushira, Vibhu, Shankukarna, Virava,
Gaveshtha, Dundubhi, Ayomukha, Shamvara, Kapila, Vāmana Marichi,
Maghavāna, Ira, Vrika, Vikshovana, Ketu, Ketuvirya, Shatahrada,
Indrajit, Satyajit, Vajranābha, the powerful Mahānābha, Kālanabha
Ekachakra, the highly powerful and mighty-armed Taraka, Vaishvanara,
Pulomā, Victravana, Mahāsura, Swarbhanu, Vrishaparva, the great Asura
Tuhunda, Sukhshma, Nichandra, Urnanabha, Mahāgiri, Asilomā, Sukeshi,
Shatha, Valaka, Mada, Gaganamurdha, the great ascetic Kumbhanābha,
Pramada, Daya, Kupatha, the energetic Hayagriva, Vaisripa, Virupaksha,
Supatha, Hara, Ahara, Hiranyakashipu, Salya and the energetic
Viprachitta—these sons of Danu were begotten by Kaçyapa. Amongst those
highly powerful Dinavas Viprachitta was the head (81-89). O king, I
cannot enumerate the offspring, sons and grandsons, of all these Dānavas
(90). Sarvana’s daughter was Prabhā, Puloma’s daughter was Sachi,
Hayasira’s daughter was Upadānavi and Vrishaparva’s daughter was
Sharmishthā (91).

Vaishwānara had two daughters Pulomā and Kalikā-they were both highly
powerful, gave birth to many children and were the wives of Kaçyapa, the
son of Marichi (92). They gave birth to sixty thousand Dānavas; of them
fourteen thousand lived in the city of Hiranya (93). Being observant of
rigid austerities Kaçyapa begat highly powerful Dānavas called Poulamas
and Kālakeyās (94). Those living in the city of Hiranya were placed by
Brahmā above destruction even by the gods. They were afterwards killed
by Savyasachi in battle (95). Nahusha was Prabhā’s son, Jayanta was
Sachi’s son, Sarmisthā gave birth to Puru and Upadānavi gave birth to
Dushmanta (96). Viprachitta begat on Singhikā another class of highly
dreadful Dānavas (97). By the union of Daity and Danava energies they
grew of dreadful prowess. Those thirteen highly powerful Dānavas were
celebrated by the name of Sainghikeyas (98). They were the powerful
Aisha, Nabha, Vala, Vatāpi, Namuchi, Ilvala, Khasrima, Anjika, Naraka,
Kālanābha, Shara, Potarana, and the energetic Vajranābha (99-100). Of
them Rāhu, the represser of the sun and the moon, was the eldest. Hrāda
had two sons, Suka and Tuhunda (101). Sunda begat on Tāraka a son by
name Mārachi, another (by name) Sivamana, energetic like a celestial
(102). All these Dānavas, multiplying the race of Danu, were great.
Their sons and grandsons were hundreds and thousands in number (103).
The noble Nivātakavachas endued with great asceticism were born in the
race of the Daitya Sanghrāda(104). Those Danavas, living in the city of
Manimati, begat three Koti offspring. The gods could not destroy them
and they were slain by Arjuna (105). It is said that Tāmrā gave birth to
six highly powerful daughters—Kake, Sweni, Bhāsi, Sugrivi, Suchi, and
Gidhrika (106). Kāki gave birth to crows, Uluki to owls, Sweni to Swena
birds, Bhāsi to Bhāsa birds, Gidhri to vultures, Suchi to waterfowls and
Sugrivi to horses, camels and asses. Such is the description of Tāmrā’s
family (107-108). Vinata had two sons, Aruna and Garuda. Suparna, the
foremost of birds, grew immensely powerful by his own action (109).
Surasā gave birth to a thousand highly powerful serpents and high-souled
sky-rangers of many heads (110). Powerful, and many headed Nagas endued
with immeasurable energy, the offspring of Kadru, were born as being
subject to Suparna (111). Amongst them Sesha, Vāsuki, Takshaka,
Airavata, Mahāpadma, Kamvala, Aswatara, Ekapatra, Shankha, Karko taka,
Dhananjāya, Mohāneela, Mahākarna, Dhritarashtra, Valāhaka, Kuhara,
Pushpapangstra, Durmukha, Sumukha, Shankhapala, Kapilā, Vāmana, Nahusha,
Sangkaroma and Manu were the heads. Fourteen thousand sons and grand
sons of these dreadful serpents were devoured by Garuda, living on
serpents. Know this class to be full of anger. All animals having teeth,
those born on land, birds and those produced by water are the offspring
of Dhara. Surabhi gave birth to kine and buffaloes (112-117). Ira
produced trees, creepers, groves and all kinds of grasses and Khasa gave
birth to Yakshas, Rakshas, Munis and Apsarās (118). Aristha gave birth
to the powerful Gandharvas of unmitigated prowess and the mobile and
immobile creation is said to have originated from Kaçyapa (119).
Hundreds and thousands of sons and grandsons have been born to them.
Such was the creation, O my child, in Swarochisha Manwantara (120). I
shall now describe to you the creation of the Patriarch Brahmā who
offered oblation to fire at the long-extending sacrifice of Varuna in
Vaivaswata Manwantara (121). Formerly when seven Rishis were procreated
by his mind the grand-father considered them as his sons (122).

O descendant of Bharata, when the conflict between the gods and demons
raged on, Diti, who had her sons slain, began to propitiate Kaçyapa
(123). Being duly adored by her and propitiated, Kaçyapa pleased her by
giving a boon. She too prayed for a highly powerful son for killing
Indra. That great ascetic, when thus begged, conferred on her the same
boon (124-125). Having conferred on her the boon without the least
anxiety the son of Marichi said:—"If being pure and observant of vows
you can hold your conception for one hundred years you will give birth
to such a son as will slay Indra (126–127)." O monarch, saying so be it
and being pure Diti obtained her conception from her that great ascetic
husband (128). Thinking of one of the leadings gods of immeasurable
power and infusing energy which the immortals even can not destroy he
knew Diti. Then that one of great vows repaired to a hilly region for
carrying on penances (129-130). From that day the slayer of Pāka (Indra)
began to seek her fault. One day before hundred years were complete
Diti, without washing her feet, lay down on her bed. Beholding her
impure state the king of gods entered into her abdomen and made her
asleep (131-132).

Then the holder of thunderbolt sundered the embryo into seven pieces.
Cut into pieces with the thunderbolt the embryo began to cry (133).
Sakra again and again prevented him saying "Do not cry! Do not cry!" The
embryo was then divided into seven pieces. Indra too, the slayer of
enemies, worked up with anger, again cut every piece into seven portions
with his thunder-bolt. From them originated the gods called Maruts, O
foremost of Bharatas (134-135). Because they were addressed by Maghavan
(saying "Do not weep" _Ma ruda_) so the Maruts were born and they all
became of help to the holder of thunder-bolt (136). When creatures thus
multiplied, O Janamejaya, Hari consoled that foremost of gods of
immeasurable energy, and then conferred kingdoms on various Patriarchs
of whom Prithu was first installed as king (137-138). That Hari is the
heroic person Vishnu, Jishnu, the Patriarch, the king of rains and is
the air in his visible form. The whole universe is His (139). O foremost
of Bharatas, he, who is informed of this creation of creatures, and he
who reads or hears the auspicious birth of the Maruts, has no fear of
being born again in this world—what of fear in the next world (140)?

⁹ They are nymphs and the nurses of Kumara.

¹⁰ The thirty three gods are:—8 Vasus, 11, Rudras, 12 Adityas, Brahma
 and Indra.