TITLE: BHARADWAJA’s FAMILY

Markandeya said:—"O my child, in the previous Yuga, the Brāhmanas, the
sons of Bharadwāja, although carrying on Yoga practices, were polluted
by their transgressions (1). On account of their degradation consequent
upon the violation of Yoga practices they will remain in an unconscious
state on the other side of the huge lake called Mānasa (2). Stupified by
the thought that the transgressions (they had committed) had been washed
away and having failed to attain to the state of union (with Brahman)
they became invested with the characteristics of time⁴⁰ (3). And
although they had deviated from the path of Yoga, they lived for a long
time in the land of celestials. They will be born in the land of Kurus
as foremost of men, the sons of Kushika (4). They will carry on
religious practices by slaying creatures for the ancestral manes. And
again being (thus) degraded they will come by the most inferior birth
(5). On account of the favour of ancestral manes and their pristine
birth they will have recollection of those inferior births (6). They
will be of controlled minds and always carry on religious practices. And
again by their own Karma they will acquire the status of Brāhmanas (7).
They will then acquire the knowledge of unification (of the human soul
with the divine soul) on account of their pristine birth. And then
having attained perfection again they will acquire the eternal region
(8). Thus you will repeatedly pay attention towards religion and acquire
a most consummate mastery of Yoga (9). It is very difficult for men of
limited understanding to acquire mastery of Yoga. If they happen to
acquire it, that even is destroyed on account of their being
contaminated by vices. Those who commit iniquities and torture their
elders (also lose their Yoga) (10). Those, who do not beg by unfair
means, who protect those seeking refuge with them, who do not disregard
the poor, who are not elated with pride on account of their riches, who
are of regular habits both as regards diet and other appetites, who
energetically carry on their own work, who are bent upon carrying on
meditation and studies, who do not seek to recover their stolen
properties, who do not always seek enjoyments, who do not take meat or
drink intoxicating liquors, who are not addicted to sexual pleasures,
who serve the Brāhmanas, who do not take pleasure in impure
conversation, who are not idle, who are not haughty and egoistic, such
accomplished persons acquire Yoga, which it is so hard to acquire in
this world. Persons of quiescent souls, who have mastered anger, who are
shorn of egotism and pride and who are observant of vows, are crowned
with blessings. Such were the Brāhmanas of that period (11-16). They
used to remember their follies consequent upon their mistakes, engage in
study and meditation and walk in the path of peace (17) There is no
other religious rite, O you conversant with religion, superior to Yoga.
It reigns supreme over all other religious observances. Practise it
therefore, O descendant of Bhrigu (18). With the advancement of years,
one, who lives upon restricted diet, who has mastered his senses and who
is respectful, acquires Yoga" (19). Having said this the reverend
Sanatkumāra disappeared therefrom. Eighteen years appeared to me as one
day (20). Having worshipped that lord of deities for eighteen years, by
the grace of that divine person, I did not suffer any pain (21). O
sinless one, I did not feel then hunger and thirst nor (the progress of)
time. Afterwards I learnt about time from my disciple (22).

⁴⁰ _i. e._ They became mortal like other creatures who become subject
 to death in time.