TITLE: THE BATTLE OF THE GODS

Vaishampayana said:—Saying so be it the king of gods, the multiplier of
the deities, delightedly, first of all, sent for Soma in battle, who had
the dews for his weapons (1).

Sakra said;—O Sudhākara,¹⁶⁵ proceed for the destruction of the demons
and for accomplishing the victory of the gods and help the holder of
noose¹⁶⁶ (2). You are gifted with incomparable energy, the lord of all
the luminous bodies, the lord of even the sun. The persons, who have a
knowledge of the juices, consider you as identical with all the juices
(3). Increase and decrease are manifest in the ocean and your orbit.
Attaching time to the universe you are creating days and nights (4). The
shadow of the earth, resembling a hair, exists in your body. The
Somadevas even, who are born of the stars, do not know this (5). You
exist above the road of the sun and other luminous bodies. Dispelling
darkness with your own body and rays you light up the world (6). You are
of white rays and cool body, the master of the luminous bodies, have a
hare on your lap, the ivisible soul of the time, are worshipped in
sacrifices, the juice of the sacrifices, eternal, the king of plants,
the source of action, water-born, of cool rays, the mine of ambrosia,
fickle and have white horses. You are the grace of the beautiful beings,
the Soma of the Somadevas and the most beautiful in all the worlds. You
dispell darkness and are the king of rays Do you accompany Varuna and
his army and destroy the demonaic illusion by which we have been burnt
down in battle (7-10).

Soma said:—O lord of the universe, O king of gods, I shall do what you
have asked me for the battle. I pour the dews which can dispell the
demonaic illusion (11). Behold in this great encounter the Dānavas
consumed with my cold, covered with dues, divested of their illusive
powers and haughtiness (12).

Vaishampāyana said:—Like unto masses of clouds the smoky showers of
dues, discharged by the moon, enveloped all the dreadful Dānavas (13).
With the pouring of dews and strokes of nooses, Varuna, the holder of
noose and the moon of white rays began to slay the demons in that great
battle (14). Pouring water in the battle-field and fighting with the
noose and cold those two lords of water began to range like two swelling
oceans (15). As the world is enveloped with Pravartaka cloud discharging
copious showers of rain at the time of the universal dissolution so that
Danava army was covered with water by Varuna and Soma (16). Taking up
the rays and the noose the moon and Varuna destroyed the illusion of the
Daitya (17). Being exhausted with cold water and fettered by the noose
the Daityas, like mountains bereft of their peaks, became (extremely)
inactive (18). Being slain by the moon, crushed down by cold and having
their bodies covered with dews those Daityas began to fall down like
extinguished fire (19). The various cars of the demons, shorn of lustre,
began to fall down and go up in the sky (20). The Dānava Maya again
displayed another huge illusion before the Dānavas who had been covered
with dews and bound down with the noose (21). He then spread in the sky
an extensive mountainous illusion coursing every where at will created
by his son Krouncha. It was covered with stones, and rocks. Its peaks
were covered with huge trees, its caves were filled with trees and it
was infested with lions, tigers and elephants. It abounded in deer
emitting cries and trees shaken by the wind (22–24). With a downpour of
rocks and trees that mountainous illusion slew the gods and revived the
Dānavas (25). Thereupon the illusion, created by the moon and Varuna,
was dispelled and Maya’s illusion covered the gods in the battle-field
with iron clouds and rocks (26). The earth, already uneven with the
collection of mountains and filled with trees, was so thickly covered
with mountains that any one could hardly traverse it (27). Some gods
were wounded with rocks, some were assailed with stones and some were
hemmed in with trees in that battle (28). Excepting the holder of club
(Vishnu) all the celestial soldiers lost their bows and had their
weapons broken. And they all became inactive (29). But that beautiful
lord of the universe, Gadhādhara, although stationed in the battle, was
not the least agitated or worked up with anger on account of his
patience (30). In order to witness the assailing of the gods and demons,
Jānārddana, conversant with the knowledge of proper time, resembling the
cloud that appears at the time of the universal dissolution, waited for
the proper hour in the battle-field (31).

Thereupon in the battle-field he ordered the fire and air to destroy the
illusion created by Maya (32). Being united with each other and
increased the increasing fire of flames and air, at the command of
Vishnu, destroyed that illusion (33). By that increasing fire of wild
course and the air that mountainous illusion was consumed and destroyed
in that great battle (34). The air, assisted by fire, increased like
that at the time of the universal dissolution. And the fire assisted by
air consumed the army of demons (35). As soon as the wind blew the fire
followed it; it appeared as if the fire and air were sporting in the
midst of the army of demons (36). When all the Dānavas were consumed and
their cars began to fall down, when the fire was successful in
accomplishing its work, when the cars desisted from slaying the demons
falling down an all sides quickly like the air, when the Daityas grew
inactive and the three worlds were freed from bonds, the gods
delightedly sent up from all sides shouts of victory (37–39). When the
thousand-eyed god achieved victory and the demon Maya met with
discomfiture all the quarters became clear and the religious
performances began to extend (40). The path of the moon was cleared up,
the sun was placed in its course, all the elements were restored to
their natural orders and men, fond of good conduct, were at ease (41).
The Regent of the dead began to carry on his work without any
distinction, oblations were offered to fire, the gods were entitled to
partake of their portions in the sacrificial offerings and find out the
utility of the celestial region (42). The regents, of the quarters,
began to range in their respective provinces, pure persons, intent on
carrying on Tapas, began to flourish and there was absence of impious
men (43). The partizans of the gods were delighted and those of the
Daityas were depressed. Virtue assumed the form of three legs and vice
that of one leg (44). The great gate was kept open and ways to morality
came into being and all the Ashramas and Varnas of the world began to
observe their own duties (45). The wandering kings began to protect
their own subjects, and hymns, in praise of the gods, were sung (46).
All the sins were removed, dreadful pride was pacified and that battle
of the fire and air was brought to a close. People accorded superiority
to them because they accomplished the victory (47).

Hearing of the fear of the air and fire entertained by the Asuras, the
well-known Dānava, by name Kālanemi, appeared in the battle-field (48).
His crown was adorned with crests effulgent like the sun; he was adorned
with Angada and his hundred arms were bedecked with hundred silvery
weapons huge as the mount Mandāra. He had a hundred faces and a hundred
heads. That beautiful demon appeared there like a mountain with a
hundred peaks (49–56). He shone there like an increasing fire on a heap
of grass in the summer season. His hairs were smoky, his beards were
green; he had huge teeth and his face was adorned with lips. He was
living in the intervening space of the three worlds with a huge body of
very great dimension. With his hands he was raising up the sky, with his
feet he was throwing away the mountains, and with his breath he was
dissipating the clouds surcharged with watery contents (51–53). That
Dānava, of expansive and red eyes looking awry, and powerful like Indra,
was as if consuming and roaring at the gods and covering the ten
quarters. They saw that Dānava approach like the proud and hungry Death
at the time of the universal dissolution (54-55). Raising up the fingers
of his right band having a beautiful palm, elevated, adorned with
well-polished finger-protectors, covered with garlands and high like
moving mountains that Dānava was, as if, saying "raise up the slain
demons" (56-57).

The celestials, stricken with fear, saw in the battle Kālanemi, like
Death himself unto his enemies (58). Creatures saw that Kālanemi proceed
like the second Nārāyana of three foot-steps (59). Raising up his front
foot and having his raiment shaken by the wind that demon, striking
terror to the gods, came to the battle-field (60). United with the Asura
king Maya Kālanemi began to proceed in battle. They appeared like Indra
and Vishnu (61). Thereupon beholding the dreadful Kālanemi approach like
death himself all the gods were filled with anxiety (62).

¹⁶⁵ This is a name of the moon. According to the Hindu mythology the
 moon is the mine of nectar.

¹⁶⁶ This is a name of Varuna whose weapon is a noose.