TITLE: KRISHNA BRINGS BACK HIS PRECEPTOR’S SON FROM THE

OCEAN.

Vaishampayana said:—Thereupon united with Rohini’s son the heroic and
powerful Krishna began to live in the city of Mathurā filled with
Yadavas (1). Gradually his body began to shine in royal and youthful
grace and he began to range in the city of Mathurā adorned with the
ocean-like Yamunā (2).

After a few days, with a view to learn Danurveda (science of war) Rāma
and Krishna, adorned with vedic study and good conduct, went to this
preceptor Sāndipani of the city of Avanti in the province of Kashi and
communicated to him their family (3-4). When they, shorn of pride began
to serve him he recognised Janārddana and Rāma as his pupils and began
to instruct them in that useful science (5). The heroic Rāma and
Janārddana could learn anything as soon as they heard it; and therefore
within sixty-four days and nights they studied and mastered all the
Vedas with their various Angas²⁶⁷ (6). In no time their preceptor taught
them Danurveda, consisting of four divisions²⁶⁸ and the mysterious use
of various other weapons (7). Thinking of their superhuman merit he used
to consider them as the moon and the sun (8). And when he offered
adoration to those two high-souled deities in Parva he used to see Siva
and Vishnu before him (9). Thereupon, O descendant of Bharata, having
finished their education Baladeva and Krishna said to their preceptor
Sāndipani:—"What fee shall we offer thee for your acting as our
preceptor (19)?" The preceptor knew their power and so with a delighted
heart said "I wish you to return me the son who died in the ocean of
salt-water (11). O Krishna, I had only one son. When I had gone out on a
pilgrimage to Pravāsa a Timi fish carried away my son. Do you bring me
back my that son (12)." With Rāma’s consent Krishna said "it will be
so." And then going to the ocean Hari entered into its water (13). With
folded hands the regent of the ocean came to Vāsudeva, who said "Where
is Sāndipani’s son (14)?" The ocean replied, "O Mādhava, a huge-bodied
demon, by name Panchajana, has devoured that boy, in the form of a Timi
fish (15)."

Hearing it the eternal Purusha Achyuta (Krishna) went to Panchajana and
killed him. But he did not get his preceptor’s son (16). The conch,
which Janārddana obtained after slaying Panchajana, is known amongst
gods and men as Panchajanya (17).

Thereupon that foremost of Purushas repaired to the abode of Vaivaswan
(Yama). Then approaching him Yama saluted Gadādhara (18). Krishna said
to him:—"Give me my preceptor’s son." Thereat there took place a
terrible encounter between them both (19). Thereupon having vanquished
the fearful son of Vivaswan, the foremost of Purusha Achyuta obtained
the child son of his preceptor (20). He then brought from Yama’s abode
his preceptor’s son lost for a long time. By the power of Krishna of
peerless energy Sāndipani’s son, dead long ago, returned in his bodily
form. Beholding this highly wonderful feat which cannot be thought of or
performed by any all the creatures were filled with surprise. Taking his
preceptor’s son, Panchajanya and diverse precious jewels, Mādhava, the
Lord of the universe, returned (21–23). Having brought all those
precious jewels through Yama’s servants the Rakshasas Vāsava’s younger
brother (Krishna) dedicated them to his preceptor (24). Having handed
over to their preceptor Sāndipani, his son, of the same age and beauty,
as before, together with all the jewels the highly intelligent Rāma and
Keshava, the foremost of all the warriors, in all the worlds, in the use
of clubs, swords and various other weapons, were pleased (25–26). Being
greatly pleased with the reconciliation with his son, who had been lost
for a long time Kashyas’s son Sāndipani honored greatly Rāma and Keshava
(27). Having acquired mastery in the use of all weapons and honored
their preceptor, those two vow-observing and heroic sons of Vasudeva
returned to Mathurā (28). Hearing of the approach of the two scions of
the Yadu race, all the Yādavas, boys and old men, headed by Ugrasena,
delightedly went out of the city to receive them (29). All the subjects,
old and young, the priests and the ministers stood before the city in
rows (30). Bugles were sounded, people began to chant the glories of
Janārddana, and all the streets were adorned with flags and garlands
(31). With Govinda’s return all the houses were filled with joy as on
the occasion of an Indra-Yajna (32). The songsters began to sing, in
high ways, songs of blessings and eulogy, highly liked by the Yadavas
(33). They made the announcement, "The two brothers, Rāma and Govinda,
celebrated all over the world, have returned to their city. Let all
fearlessly sport with their friends" (34). O king, when Govinda arrived
at Mathurā, there was none who was poorly, sorrowful or insensible (35).
The birds began to pour sweet notes, and the horses, elephants and cows
were all cheerful. And men and women attained to mental felicity (36).
Delightful winds began to blow and the ten quarters were freed from dust
and all the tutelary deities in the temples became delighted (37). What
more when Janārddana arrived at the city all the signs, that were
visible in the golden age, appeared there (38).

Thereupon in an auspicious moment ascending a car drawn by horses,
Janārddana, the slayer of his enemies, entered the city of Mathurā (39).
As the gods follow Sakra so all the Yadavas followed Upendra when he
entered the charming city of Mathurā (40). Thereafter as the sun and
moon enter into the setting mountain so those two descendants of Yadu
delightedly entered into Vasudevā’s house (41). Keeping all their arms
in their own house those high-souled sons of Vasudeva, ranging at will
along with the Yādavas, began to range in woods full of fruits and
flowers and in streamlets of clear water near the Raivata mountain
beautified with lotus leaves and Kārandavas. Thus Rāma and Keshava, of
beautiful faces and having one heart enjoyed there a few days under
Ugrasena (42–45).

²⁶⁷ A division of Hindu learning comprehending such science as is
 considered dependant upon the Vedas, hence called Vedanga; works
 on six subjects come under this description, viz., pronunciation,
 grammar, prosody, explanation of obscure terms, description of
 religious rites and astronomy.

²⁶⁸ The four division are (1) _Diksha_, initiation, (2) _Sangraha_
 collection, (3) _Sidhi_, proficiency (4) _Prayoga_ the use.