TITLE: THE ORIGIN OF THE EARTH

Prithu said:—He, who for one individual destroys many lives either
belonging to his own side or to his opposite party, commits a sin in
this world (1). By slaying that harmful person at whose death many
become happy one is not visited by sin, either great or small (2). If by
the destruction of one wicked person the well-being of many is secured
such an act leads to the acquisition of virtue (3). I shall therefore,
for the behoof of my subjects, kill you, O earth. If you do not satisfy
this command of mine conducive to the well-being of the world I shall
kill you with this arrow who have neglected my command. And having
buried my own self (under the earth) I shall uphold my subjects forever
(4-5). O you ever observant of pious rites, do you, during my regeme,
give life to my subjects for you are capable of protecting them (6). Do
you give milk for me and then I will withdraw the dreadful arrow that I
have taken up for your destruction (7).

The earth said:—O hero, forsooth shall I carry out all that you have
said. If works are undertaken along with the means they always prove a
success (8). So do you resort to the means by which all the subjects may
be protected. Behold this my calf. Being attached to it I shall give
milk (9), O you foremost of the pious, do you level my surface all over,
so that my milk may reach everywhere (10).

Vaishampāyana said:—Thereupon Vena’s son, with the end of his bow,
uprooted thousands of hills for which they multiplied greatly (in
number) (11). Vena’s son Prithu then levelled the surface of the earth.
In the past Manwantara she was of uneven surface (12). The earth was by
nature both even and uneven; such was her state in Chakshusha Manwantara
(13). The earth having been uneven in the previous Manwantara there
existed no regular division of the cities and villages (14). There was
no corn, no rearing of kine, agriculture or trade. There was neither
truth, untruth, avarice nor pride (15). O king, now with the advent of
Vaivaswata Manwantara, agriculture, trade and the keeping of kine have
originated from Vena’s son Prithu (16). O sinless one, at that time
people desired to makes their habitations at all those places of the
earth which were levelled (17). Then with great difficulty people could
live upon fruits and roots. This I have heard (18). Having converted the
Manu Swayambhuva into a calf the powerful son of Vena, Prithu, the
foremost of men, milched the earth for all sorts of corns with his own
hands (19). On that food, O my child, the people are daily living even
now. I have heard the earth was again milched by the Rishis. Soma became
their calf; the son of Angiras, the highly energetic Vrihaspati, milched
her. The Vedas were the vessels, O descendant of Bharata, and the
eternal devotion to Brahman was the incomparable milk (20-21). I have
heard she was again milched by all the celestials headed by Purandara
with golden vessels (in their hands) (22). Then Maghavān (Indra) became
the calf and the lord Sun milched her. A continued flow of milk came out
on which the Devas are living (23). I have heard the earth was again
milched by the ancestral manes of unlimited prowess, with silver vessels
(in their hands) (24). The powerful son of Vivaswat became the calf and
Antaka, the destroyer of Lokas (worlds), milched her (26). O foremost of
men, I have heard, that making Takshaka the calf, the Nāgas milched her
with the cavity of their palms as vessels and got poison for the milk
(26). O foremost of Bharatas, O king, the powerful Airavata
Dhritarashtra became the milcher when the Nāgas and serpents milched her
(27). By that poison the huge serpents of deadly venom are living their
dreadful lives. They live on poison, they give out poison and poison
constitutes their energy (23). I have heard that the earth was again
milched by Asuras with iron vessels for the illusory power capable of
over-powering the enemies (29). Pralhāda’s son Virochana became their
calf and the highly powerful, two-headed Madhu, the priest of the
Daityas milched her (30). By that Māyā (illusory power) the Asuras have
been rendered adepts in illusion. The Asuras, endued with immeasurable
wisdom, are therefore so very powerful (31). I have heard, O monarch,
that the earth was again, in the days of yore, milched by Yakshas for
eternal disappearance from view with uncouth vessels (32). The highly
effulgent and pious Yakshas made Vaisravana their calf. The ascetic
three-headed son of Yaksha, by name Rajatanābha, the father of
Maninābha, milched (the earth). By that (power of disappearance into
another’s body) they are now still living. This the great saint Nārada
has said (33-34). O foremost of men, with a view to afford gratification
to their children the earth was again milched by the Rākshasas and
Pishāchas with the skulls of dead bodies (35). O glory of the Kuru race,
Rajatanābha milched (the earth) for them. Sumāli became the calf and
blood came out for the milk (36). By that bloody milk the immortal
Yakshas, Rakshasas, Pishāchas and other ghosts are keeping their lives
(37). O foremost of men, having made Chitraratha their calf the
Gandharvas and Apsarās again milched her with lotus vessels for sweet
perfume (38). O foremost of Bharatas, the greatly powerful and the
high-souled king of Gandharvas, Suruchi, resembling the Sun itself,
milched (her) for them (39). O king, I have heard that the mountains
again milched her for the herbs in forms and various jewels (40).
Himavāna became the calf and the great mountain Sumeru milched (her).
Other great mountains were the vessels and by that the mountains are
increasing in proportions (41). I have heard, O king, that the trees, in
the days of yore, once milched her with Palāsa leaves as vessels for
reviving the scorched and burnt trees and creepers (42). The blossoming
Sāla tree milched her and the Plaksha tree became the calf. That
purifying Earth, who sustains all, is the instrument of the birth and
preservation of the entire mobile and immobile creations. When milched
she gives all desired-for objects and produces all corns (43-44).
Extending up to the ocean she was celebrated under the name of _Medini_.
Her entire surface was filled with the fat (of the demons) Madhu and
Katabha. Therefore was she called _Medini_ by Brahmā and others (45). O
descendant of Bharata, when she was brought under the subjection of the
king Prithu, the son of Vena and became his daughter¹² she came by the
name of Prithivi. Being divided and purified by Prithu the earth has
become full of corns, mines, cities and provinces. O best of kings, such
a powerful king was the son of Vena (46–47). Undoubtedly he is an object
of reverence and adoration of all creatures. Prithu, born of eternal
Brahmā, is worthy of the adoration even of the great Brāhmanas,
well-read in the Vedas and all their divisions. The powerful prime king
Prithu, the son of Vena, deserves also the adoration of the great kings
who desire kingdoms. The first king of the heroes, Prithu, is also
worthy of the adoration of the valiant warriors who wish for victory in
battle (48–50). The warrior, who issues out for battle after reciting
the name of the king Prithu, is crowned with success and glory even in
dreadful battles (51). The illustrious king Prithu, who conferred
livelihood on all, is worthy of the adoration of the wealthy Vaisyas who
carry on trade (52). The first king is also worthy of the adoration of
the pure Sudras who serve the three other Varnas and who wish for
supreme well-being (53). O monarch, I have thus described the various
calves, those who milched, the various sorts of milk and vessels. What
more shall I describe to you? (54)

¹² Literally it means ’when she was milched by him’. She was milched
 by the king Prithu and became his daughter and therefore she was
 called Prithivi.