TITLE: AN ACCOUNT OF HAIHAYAS AND KARTAVIRYA

Vaishampayana said:—Yadu had five sons equal unto the sons of the
celestials. They were Sahasrada, Payoda, Kroshta, Neela and Anjika. O
king, Sahasrada had three highly pious sons–Haihaya, Haya and Venuhaya.
Haihaya’s son was celebrated by the name of Dharmanetra. His son was
Kārta whose son was Sāhanja (1–3). That king founded a city named
Sāhanjani. The king Mahishmān was his son. By him the city of Mahishmati
was founded. The powerful Bhadrasenya was Mahishmān’s son. As recount ed
by me before he was the ruler of Bārānashi. Bhadrasenya’s son was
Durdama (4–6). Durdama’s son was Kanka who was very intelligent. Kanka
had four sons well-known in the world, namely Kritavirya, Kritoujā,
Kritavarmā and Kritāgni. From Kritavirya, Arjuna was born who had a
thousand arms and became the emperor of the seven insular continents. He
alone, in his car effulgent like the sun, conquered the world (7–9).
Having carried on hard austerities for a million of years that royal son
of Kritavirya succeeded in pleasing Atri’s son Datta who conferred on
him four very powerful boons. The first of these, was that he would get
one thousand arms (10–11). The second was that the sages would prevent
him from imbibing irreligious thoughts. The third was that having
conquered the world with fierce Kshatriya energies he would please his
subjects duly. The fourth was that when he would gain many battles and
destroy thousands of enemies he would be killed in battle by a highly
powerful man (12–13). O king, when that ascetic king engaged in a
battle, he, by virtue of asceticism and illusory energy, acquired
thousand arms. By his dreadful prowess he conquered the earth consisting
of seven insular continents, many mountains and oceans. O Janamejaya, we
have heard that king duly celebrated seven hundred Yajnas in the seven
insular continents (14–16). O large-armed one, in those _Yajnas_
thousands of presents were given away. In those _Yajnas_ golden
sacrificial posts and altars were set up. They were all adorned with
gods in celestial cars, with Gandharvas and Apsarās. In his Yajnas, the
Gandharvas and Nārada sang hymns. Seeing his glory Baridasa was struck
with wonder (17-19).

Narada said:—None, among the kings, will attain to the dignity of
Kārtavirya by celebrating Yajnas, making presents, by his prowess and
knowledge of scriptures (20). People saw him ranging in his car
simultaneously, by virtue of his Yoga power, over the seven insular
continents with his armour, sword and bow (21). On account of his
righteously protecting his subjects that great king lost nothing, never
felt any grief nor made a mistake (22). He was the owner of all sorts of
jewels and Lord Paramount. He ruled for eighty-five thousand years (23).
He performed many _Yajnas_ and owned extensive lands. He was like Indra
on account of profuse showers and like Arjuna for his ascetic powers
(24). Like the sun shining with all its thousand rays during the autumn
he shone with his thousand arms with armours on and hardened by the
strokes of his bow-string (25). Having defeated the sons of the Nāga⁵⁸
Karkotaka that highly effulgent king occupied his city, by name
Mahishmati, for the habitation of mankind (26). While sporting in the
water during the rains that lotus-eyed king changed the current of the
ocean with his thousand arms (27). While he sported and bathed in the
water of the river Narmadā engarlanded with her foam she used to
approach him in fear with her thousand waves (28). When he used to
agitate the mighty deep with his thousand arms the great Asuras, living
in the nether region, became inert and silent (29). As the mount
Mandāra, when thrown off by the gods and demons, (agitated) the ocean of
milk so did the king Arjuna, the son of Kritavirya, crush down the waves
of the ocean, shake the fish and other huge acquatic animals, whirl the
foam with air and create whirlpools of water. Awakened by the motion of
the mount Mandāra, terrified by the production of ambrosia and troubled
all on a sudden, the huge Uragas became motionless and humble at the
sight of that terrible man. They trembled before him like plantain
leaves shaken by the evening breeze (30–33). Having vanquished, with his
might, the haughty king of Lanka, Rāvana with his army and made him
senseless with five arrows he bound him with his bow-string, brought him
to the city of Mahishmati and kept him in chains there (34).

Hearing that his son Rāvana had been kept in chains by Arjuna Pulastya
went to him. Then solicited by him Kritavirya’s son Arjuna set free
Pulastya’s son Rāvana (35). The twang of his bow, when drawn by his
thousand arms, was like the clapping of thunder-bolts accompanied by
clouds at the time of the universal dissolution (36). But how great was
the power of Bhrigu’s son (Parashurāma) who sundered in battle the
thousands arms of that king resembling a forest of golden palm trees
(37). Once on a time Chitrabhānu, stricken with thirst, begged of him
(something). Arjuna conferred on Vibhāvasu the seven insular continents.
The fire god (some time after) wished to consume his cities and
villages. With the help of that foremost of men, the great Kārtavirya he
succeeded in destroying the mountains and forests (38–40). The effulgent
Vasishtha, whom Varuna obtained as his son in the days of yore, passed
by another name Apava. The fire-god, together with Kārtavirya burnt down
the charming hermitage of Varuna’s son. He was therefore greatly
terrified. The ascetic Apava, in anger, imprecated a curse on Arjuna,
saying:—"Since O Haihaya, you have not left out my hermitage, another
man will destroy your work so acquired by you with difficulty. The
ascetic, powerful and the mighty-armed Brāhmana, Rāma, the son of
Jamadagni born in the Bhrigu race, will chop off your thousand arms and
slay you (41-43.)"

Vaishampāyana said:—O king, O subduer of enemies, on account of the
imprecation of the ascetic Apava Kritavirya’s son the king Arjuna, under
whose righteous rule even his subjects did not lose anything, met with
his death. O descendant of Kuru, he himself prayed to Datātreya for this
boon (46–47). Amongst the hundred sons of that high-souled one only five
survived him. They were all powerful, heroic, virtuous and intelligent,
and were proficient in the use of weapons. They were Shurasena, Shura,
Dhristokta, Krishna and Jayadhwaja, king of Avanti (48–49). Kārtavirya’s
sons were all powerful, and mighty car-warriors. Jayadhwaja’s son was
the highly powerful Tālajangha. His sons passed by the name of
Tālajanghas. O king, in the race of the high-souled Haihayas, Vitihotra,
Sujāta, Bhoja, Avanti, the powerful Toundika, and several others were
known by the name of Tālajanghas (50–52). It is needless to describe the
descendants of Bharata and Sujāta. The pious Vrisha and others, O king,
were born in the Yadu race (53). Vrisha was the head of the family and
his son was Madhu. He had a hundred sons of whom Vrishana perpetuated
the race. From Vrishana were born the Vrishnis, from Madhu the Mādhavas
and from Yadu the Yadavas. These were the various branches of the
Haihaya family (51–55). Shura, Shurasena and Shuravira passed by the
name of Haihayas. The country, of those high-souled ones, was celebrated
by the name of Shurasena. He, who in this world, recounts daily the
birth of Kritavirya’s son, Arjuna, does not lose his property. And even
if he loses it he acquires it again (56–57).

O king, thus I have described the families of the five heroic sons of
Yayāti, celebrated in the world. They are like the five elements
preserving the mobile and immobile creation (58). A king, well read in
the Vedas and other religious scriptures, becomes the master of five
senses and god-like and obtains the five boons which it is difficult to
get in this world, if he listens to the various creations of those five
kings. By listening to an account of the families of these five kings
Ayu acquired renown, riches, sons, power and prosperity (59–60).

Hear, O king, now of the most excellent and powerful family of the pious
Krousthu, the head of the Yadu family who performed Yajnas. In his
family the lord of the Vrishni race, Vishu was born as Krishna. By
hearing of an account of Krousthu’s family a man is freed from all his
sins (61–63.)

⁵⁸ The Nagas were evidently an aboriginal race amongst whom many
 powerful kings flourished.