TITLE: AKRURA GOES TO VRAJA

Vaishampayana said:—Thereupon when, the sun, with weakened rays, set,
when in the evening crimson sky, the disc of the moon became tawny
coloured, when the birds entered into their nests, when the fire was
enkindled by the sacrificers, when the quarters were enshrouded a little
with darkness, when in that delightful night of the spring, Sukas,
Valakas and other birds fell asleep in the village of the milk-men, when
the night-rangers, fond of meat, became delighted, when the delightful
night of Indra Gopas, when the study of the Vedas is stopped, set in,
when the hour for boiling milk—a necessary adjunct of an Agnihotra
ceremony for the householders, appeared, when the hermits began to offer
oblations to fire, when the cows came back, and having their calves
bound (to stakes) at the time of yielding milk began to bellow, when the
milk-men, with long ropes for binding cows, and setting up a noise,
began to call their kine, by names and collect them, when fire was set
to dried cow-dung by Gopas returned from the forest and having their
shoulders bent down by the weight of woods, when after the termination
of the day and with the beginning of night the moon rose and shone, when
with the disappearance of the rays of the sun the day passed away and
with the shining rays of the moon the night set in, when the sky grew
effulgent like burning fire, Akrura, as if along with birds about to
enter into their nests, arrived at Vraja in his car, with a view of
communicating happy news of union with friends. Having entered there
that giver of gifts frequently enquired after Keshava, Rohini’s son and
Nanda Gopa (1-14).

Thereupon coming down from the chariot that highly powerful and liberal
prince, resembling a Vasu, entered Nanda’s house (15). As soon as he
entered the gate with his face full of joy and eyes full of tears he saw
Krishna stationed at the milking-place in the midst of calves like a
bull. Greatly delighted at seeing Krishna, the pious Akrura with heavy
accents, said "Come to me, O Keshava." And beholding Vāsudeva, at the
junction of boyhood and youth who lay on a fig-leaf at the time of the
universal dissolution, and who assumed the form of a dwarf at the time
of imposing on Bali, served by the prosperity of the three worlds, he
praised him again and again and said within himself:—"This is the
lotus-eyed Krishna of the size of a huge mountain, resembling an ocean
overflowed with water and endued with the prowess of a lion and tiger.
Irrepressible in battle he has the mystic mark of Srivatsa on his breast
and his well-adorned arms are like a ground where the enemies are being
killed (16-20). He is the incarnation of Vishnu under the guise of a
milk-man who is the first worshipful of the universe and whose form is
Upanishad. His hairs have stood erect (on seeing a votary) (21). His
head, resembling an umbrella, is worthy of a crown, his ears of two most
excellent Kundalas and his spacious breast of a neck-chain. And his two
plump and long arms have increased his beauty (22-23). Clad in a yellow
raiment, his body, looked after by a thousand of women can even cut
Madana (Cupid) to the quick. He is the eternal Vishnu (24). The lord,
whose two feet are the refuge of the earth, and which covered the three
worlds, has himself descended on earth (25). His beautiful right hand is
fit for holding the discus and his left hand is, as if, willing to hold
a club (26). With his first foot²⁵⁸ he has descended on earth. And that
foremost of the celestials is shining on earth (27).

"The Brāhmanas, conversant with the knowledge of future, have said that
the Lord Gopāla will multiply the almost extinct Yadu race (28). As the
torrents fill up the great ocean, so hundreds and thousands of Yadavas
by his power will fill up their respective families (29). When the
commander of the enemies will be slain the entire, eternal and
prosperous universe will abide by his commands, as in the golden age
(30). While on earth he will subjugate the entire world; and though not
a king he will rule over all the crowned heads (31). As in the days of
yore, vanquishing Bali with his three foot-steps he installed Purandara
as the king of gods in the celestial region, so subjugating the three
worlds with his two feet he will forsooth now install Ugrasena as the
Lord Paramount (32-33). While Keshava, the Creator of ocean-like
hostilities, who is well-versed in many lores regarding the kings, the
Ancient Purusha, whom the Brāhmanas have hymned in the Vedas, has become
desirous of living like a man, forsooth he will be an object of
imitation to all the worlds (34–35). To-day with _mantras_ I shall duly
adore in my mind the divinity and the person of Vishnu (36). The
Maharshis, endued with spiritual knowledge, know him as superhuman. That
he has appeared amongst men and has become one of our kinsmen is
undoubtedly superhuman (37). However holding a consultation with Krishna
in the night, I shall, if he likes, take him and the Gopas to Mathurā"
(38).

Beholding Krishna and thus recapitulating within himself thoughts
pregnant with reasoning and high significance he entered into the court
of Nanda Gopa (39).

²⁵⁸ In his true Brahma form devoid of all qualities. The four feet are
 Viswa, Taijasa, Prajna and Turya.