TITLE: A DESCRIPTION OF VILLAGE VRAJA

Vaishampayana said:—Vasudeva had already heard of the son, more
beautiful than the moon, given birth to by Rohini in the village of
Vraja (1). He, without delay, said to the milkman Nanda, in sweet words
"Quickly go to Vraja with Yashodā. Having performed the various rites
consequent upon their birth do you happily bring up in Vraja those two
boys (2-3). Do you carefully protect in Vraja that son of mine whom
Rohini has given birth to. My name will then be mentioned as having a
son in the list of the ancestral manes (4). Alas, I have not been able
to see the face of my only son. Although I am wise this is stealing away
my wisdom (5). I specially fear this woked Kansa for he does not feel
the least mercy when he kills the children. Besides various other
dangers threaten the children in this world. Therefore, O Nanda, take
care of Rohini’s son as you do of your own (6-7). My son is the eldest
and your son is the youngest. The import of their names is also the
same. Therefore bring them up with equal care (8). They are both of
equal age. Please see, O milkman, that they may grow up under your
fostering care and grace Vraja (9). In their childhood, everybody takes
his own way, becomes naughty and commits mistakes. Therefore train them
with great care (10). Never make your cow-sheds in Vrindavana for there
is every fear of the wicked Keshi, of various reptiles, insects and
vultures. Protect those two boys against the cows and calves in the
cow-shed (11-12). O Nanda, night is almost over. Go soon to Vraja. See,
the birds in the south are also asking you to do so" (13).

Hearing of this secret intelligence from the large-minded Vasudeva,
Nanda was greatly pleased and ascended his conveyance along with Yashoda
(14). He placed the baby prince on a vehicle carried by men on their
shoulders (15). He then proceeded by a road situate on the bank of
Yamunā, sprinkled with profuse water and filled with cool air (16).

Thus proceeding to some distance he saw Vraja, the charming village of
cows, situated on the bank of Yamunā near the mount Govarddhana and
filled with cool air (17). It was adorned with animals emitting sweet
cries, huge trees covered with creepers, and kine, giving milk and
grazing (18). That place was so beautifully level that the kine could
range there at ease and the tanks there had all well-levelled stairs.
The trees were scratched by the humps and horns of the bulls (19).
Vultures, wild cats, falcons and other birds, who are fond of flesh and
always follow them, and other beasts more powerful than they, such as
jackals, leopards and lions always live there. And for this that place
was filled with fat, marrow and bones (20). That place, covered with
profuse grass, was filled with birds of various species and the roaring
of tigers, was well adorned with trees crested with sweet fruits and was
resonant with the auspicious sound of kine, and calves. That charming
village was filled with milk-maids (21–22). The roads, for carriage,
were spacious there. It was covered with thorns and its outside was
filled with fallen huge trees (23).

All through the circumference there were stakes fixed on the ground an
ropes for the calves; and it was filled with cow-dungs. The temples and
cottages there were covered with grass (24). It was filled with the
sound of churning. State officials, possessing all the signs of
prosperity and well-developed and delighted persons always live there
(25). The ground there was saturated with the leavings of curd and the
drains were covered with moss and it was filled with the sound of the
churning bangles of milk-women (26). The cow-sheds were all properly
protected by well-shut doors; inside them were the houses for cows. It
was filled with the play-grounds of milk-men and abounded in boys
wearing feathers of crows (27). The youthful damsels of milk-men, clad
in blue raiments, prepare clarified butter and accordingly there blows
sweet-scented air (28). Having their heads adorned with garlands of wild
flowers and their breasts covered with jackets, the milk-maids, with
jars of milk on their heads, always walk about there (29). The road, on
the bank of Yamunā, was also filled with milk-maids, carrying water.
When the milk-man Nanda, with a delighted heart, entered by this way to
his village there arose a great shout of joy amongst the men of his
clan. The elderly milk men and women came out and received him in the
city. He also went to that delightful place of his own accord. Thereupon
going to the beloved wife of Vasudeva Rohiai, he placed there the mystic
Purusha Krishna, resembling the rising sun (30–32).