TITLE: NIKUMBHA CARRIES AWAY BHANUMATI

Vaishampāyana said:—While the virtuous Yadavas were thus sporting the
highly wicked and unapproachable Dānava, Nikumbha, the enemy of the
gods, desirous of bringing on his self-destruction, finding a loop-hole,
stole away the beautiful daughter of Bhānu by name Bhānumati (1–2). O
hero, formerly, the daughter of his brother Vajranābhā, by name
Prabhāvati, had been taken away by Pradyumna and Vajranābha had been
killed. Remembering this former enmity and keeping himself aside that
one, proficient in illusions, played upon the women of the Yādavas and
stole away Bhānumati (3–4). Although the garden, attached to the female
appartment of Bhānu, was unapproachable, still at that time there were
no guards for the Yadavas were busy with their sports. Taking advantage
of this weak moment the wretched Dānava carried away the maiden (5). O
thou the victor of armies, while that weeping maiden was being carried
away there arose all on a sudden a great tumult in the female appartment
(6). Hearing lamentations in the female appartment of Bhānu, the heroes,
Vasudeva and Ahuka issued out, filled with wrath. And not seeing the
offender before them, they, in that dress, went where the highly
powerful Krishna was (7-8). Hearing of that great insult, Janārddana,
the slayer of his enemies, rode, together with Pārtha, Garuda the enemy
of the serpents (9). Having commanded the hero having the emblem of a
Makara on his flag to follow him on his car he asked Kashyapa’s son
Garuda to proceed (10). O king, before Nikumbha, unconquerable in
battle, could reach the city of Vajra, Pārtha and Krishna, the slayers
of their enemies, overtook him in the way (11). Beholding them the
highly powerful Pradyumna, the foremost of those conversant with
illusions, divided himself into three portions (12). On the other hand,
Nikumbha, like unto an immortal, smilingly fought with them all with
heavy clubs (13). Holding the maiden Bhānumati by his left hand, the
great Asura Nikumbha repeatedly hurled the club with his right hand.
Although thus assailed, Keshava, Kāma (Pradyumna) and Arjuna, none,
could strike him ruthlessly lest they might wound the maiden (14-15). O
king, although capable of slaying that irrepressible enemy they began to
sigh piteously out of their excessive compassion for the maiden (16). As
when a serpent gets round a camel, a man, well up in the use of arms,
strikes the serpent leaving the camel to itself, so Pārtha, the foremost
of archers, began to strike the Daitya with his arrows (17). In
pursuance of the rules of art, their training and reasoning, Pārtha,
Kāma and Krishna did not strike the maiden but wounded the Danavas with
their cane-like arrows (18). Thereupon resorting to his illusory powers
Nikumbha so disappeared with the maiden from that place that nobody
could know it: Krishna, Kāma and Dhananjaya however immediately pursued
him: he, however, went on assuming the semblance of a yellow vulture
(19-20). Thereupon saving the maiden, the heroic Dhananjaya assailed him
again with cane-like arrows piercing his very vitals (21). Thus pursued
by those heroes that great Asura, the slayer of his enemies, travelled
all over the earth consisting of seven insular continents and dropped
down with the maiden at last on the bank of the river Chela Gangā
flowing on the summit of the mount Gokarna (22–23). None amongst the
gods, Asuras or great ascetics could cross that mountain protected by
the energy of Mahadeva (24). Finding this weak point of Nikumbha, the
Bhaima chief Pradyumna, invincible in battle and quick coursing, got
hold of the maiden Bhānumati. And Krishna, and Arjuna began to assail
the Asura greatly with arrows. Then leaving the northern range of the
mount Gokarna, Nikumbha fled to the southern range. Both the Krishnas
however, riding on Garuda, pursued him (25–26). Gradually the great
Asura entered into Shatpura, the abode of his kinsmen and those two
heroes spent the night at the mouth of the cave. With Krishna’s
permission the heroic son of Rukshmini delightedly took Bhaima’s
daughter to the city of Dwārakā. And keeping her there he returned to
Shatpura, full of Dānavas and beheld the two Krishnas of dreadful
prowess at the mouth of the cave (27-29). Thus occupying the entrance of
the city of Shatpura the highly powerful Krishna and Arjuna, desirous of
slaying Nikumbha, waited there with Pradyumna (30).

Thereupon desirous of fighting the highly powerful Nikumbha came out of
the cave, O king, no sooner he came out of the cave than Dhananjaya,
with arrows shot off his Gandiva bow, obstructed the thorough-fair. In
spite of it Nikumbha, the foremost of the powerful, came out, took up
his club covered with thorns and struck Pārtha on his head (31–33). Thus
assailed with that club Pritha’s son vomitted blood and lost his
consciousness. The Asura, master of illusions, smilingly struck the
heroic son of Rukshmini, the foremost of those conversant with
illusions, who was waiting with his face against him. Wounded on the
head with that unseen stroke of the club the heroic Pradyumna lost his
consciousness. Beholding them thus assailed and insensible Govinda,
having Gada as his elder brother, beside himself with anger, took up his
club Koumodaki and ran towards Nikumbha. Those two irrepressible heroes,
roaring, fought with each other (34–37). Riding his elephant Airāvata
along with the gods Sachi’s Lord began to witness that dreadful combat
like unto the battle between the celestials and Asuras. Beholding the
gods Hrishikesha, the slayer of his enemies, tried to kill the Dānavas
in a wonderful battle, desirous of doing good unto the gods (38-39).
Whirling his Koumodaki, the large-armed Keshava, conversant with
military science, displayed many wondrous manoeuvres (40). Nikumbha too,
the foremost of Asuras, by virtue of his training hurled his club,
covered with many thorns, and displayed various manoeuvres (41). At that
time they fought like two roaring bulls for a cow, two roaring elephants
and two leopards worked up with anger (42). O Bhārata, thereupon setting
a highly dreadful shout, he, with his club, set with eight bells, struck
Krishna having Gada as his elder brother. He too hurling his huge club
threw it on Nikumbha’s head (43-44). At that time holding idle for a
moment his Koumodaki club the intelligent preceptor of the world, Hari
fell down insensible on earth (45). O king, while the high-souled
Vasudeva was reduced to this plight the whole world was filled with
lamentations. With the cool water of Mandākini mixed with ambrosia, the
king of gods himself sprinkled Keshava. O king, Krishna, the foremost of
gods, did so of his own accord, or else who can render the high-souled
Hari insensible?

O descendant of Bharata, thereupon regaining his consciousness, Krishna,
the slayer of his enemies, took up his discus and asked the wicked Asura
to bear it (49). At that time casting off his body there the
irrepressible Nikumbha, a great Māyāvin, went away. Keshava however
could not know it (50). Thinking that either he was dead or on the point
of death and remembering the obligations of the heroes he did not strike
him who was fallen. Thereupon regaining their consciousness Pradyumna
and Arjuna came there and considering Nikumbha dead stood by Krishna
(51-52). Afterwards coming to know of the real truth Pradyumna,
conversant with illusions, said to Krishna:—"O father, the wicked
Nikumbha is not here. He has fled somewhere else" (53). No sooner
Pradyumna said this than Nikumbha’s body disappeared. Seeing it the
powerful Lord, with Arjuna, laughed (54). O heroic king, few minutes
after they saw all over the earth and welkin thousands of Nikumbha. The
spectators also saw the heroic Krishna, Pārtha and Rukshmini’s son in
innumerable forms. It appeared indeed wonderful (55–56). At that time
amongst those great Asuras some held Pārtha’s bow, some his huge arrows,
some his hands and some his feet (57). Thus when the innumerable bodies
of Pārtha were caught the Asuras carried away the heroic Dhananjaya to
the sky. Thus when separated from Pārtha the heroic Krishna and his son
pierced Nikumbha with numerous shafts. Still they could not see his end.
One Nikumbha, divided into twain, became two. Thereupon seeing every
thing correctly by his celestial wisdom the Divine Lord Krishna, the
origin of the present and future and the slayer of Asuras, saw the true
form of Nikumbha, the creator of illusions and the stealer of
Dhananjaya. And before the presence of all creatures he, with his
discus, cut off his head (58–62.) O descendant of Bharata, when his head
was thus sundered that foremost of Asuras, leaving aside Dhananjaya,
fell down like an uprooted tree (63). O giver of honors, at that time
Pārtha was about to drop down from the sky. At Krishna’s mandate his son
held him up (64). When Nikumbha thus fell down on earth the deity
Krishna consoled Keshava and with him repaired to Dwarakā (65).

Having returned delightedly to Dwarakā the Lord Krishna, O descendant of
Yadu, and the foremost of Dāsharhas, saluted the high-souled Narada
(66). Thereupon the highly energetic Nārada said to Bhānu:—"O descendant
of Bhaima, do not consider yourself insulted on account of your daughter
being carried away (by another). O Bhānu, listen to great cause hereof
(67). O hero, on one occasion while sporting in the garden of Raivata,
this your daughter excited the anger of the foremost of Munis Durvāsā
who wrath fully imprecated a curse on her saying:—’She is very much
ill-mannered and she must fall into the hands of an enemy.’ At that
time, myself along with other Munis, propitiated him on behalf of your
daughter saying:—’Muni, O foremost of the pious, dost thou, informed of
the essence of religion as thou art, imprecate a curse on this innocent
girl who is observing her religious obligations? We request thee to show
favour into her’ (68-70). O Bhaima chief, after we had said this Durvāsā
stood with his face down for a moment and then stricken with compassion
said:—’What I have said will prove true. It will never be otherwise.
Forsooth she will fall into the hands of an enemy. Although thus fallen
into the hands of an enemy she will not be virtually contaminated; and
she will obtain a beautiful husband, will be lucky, a mother of many
sons and mistress of immense riches; this thin-built lady will always
have beautiful fragrance around her person, will always remain youthful
and will forget the sorrow consequent upon her being carried away by the
enemy (71–74)’. O hero, thus it had been pre-ordained so for Bhanumati
before; do you now confer her on Sahadeva for that son of Pandu is
virtuous, respectful and heroic (75)".

Thereupon regarding the words of Nārada, the virtuous souled Bhāima gave
away Bhāuumati to Madri’s son Sahadeva (76). Having sent an emissary
Keshava, the holder of discus, had brought Sahadeva there. After the
wedding ceremony was over, he, with his wife, returned to his own city.
The man, who reverentially listens to this conquest of Krishna or reads
it, acquires success in every business (77-78).