TITLE: THE DESTRUCTION OF THE DEMON PRALAMVA

Vaishampayana said:—Thereupon leaving off that forest of palm trees the
two sons of Vasudeva again came to the Bhandira tree (1). Traversing
that prosperous forest land and tending the ever increasing flock of
kine those two beautiful subduers of enemies began to strike their arms
and sing. Sometimes they collected the trees and called the kine with
their calves by names (2–3). They had ropes hanging on their shoulders
and their breasts were adorned with garlands of auspicious wild flowers.
And they looked like two bulls with new-grown horns (4). Having the hue
of gold and powdered collyrium and clad in apparels of the same color
with their respective persons, those two boys appeared like white and
black clouds accompanied by rain-bow²¹⁵ (5). Traversing the forest-ways
along with their comrades, making beautiful ear-rings with the tips of
Kuçā grass or flowers, and putting on wild dresses they sometimes
sported on the mount Govardhana, sometimes in the forest and some times
in the table-land. They thus engaged in a sport which was celebrated all
over the world (6-7). Thus following human conduct and engaging in a
play introduced by milk-men they, who were worshipful even unto the
celestials, began to range in the forest (8).

Thus sporting, they, within a short time, reached the Bhāndiraka
fig-tree covered with growing branches—the best of the kind (9). They,
who were experts in fighting, began to play there with cradles, nets and
stones (10). Those two heroes, powerful like lions, began to display
there, in the company of cow-herd boys, of their own accord and with
delight, many a martial feat (11). While they were thus playing, the
foremost of Asuras, by name Pralamva, came there with a view to kill
them and began to find out their weak points (12). Assuming the form of
a cow-herd and adorned with wild flowers that Asura began to tempt the
two brothers with his play and smiles (13). Adopting a human form,
although not born in the race of men that foremost of Dānavas,
fearlessly joined their company (14). Considering him, who came there in
the form of a milk-man, as their friend, those cow-herds began to play
with that enemy of the immortals (15). Searching their weak points
Pralamva too, who had assumed the guise of a milk-man, cast his dreadful
looks at Krishna and Rohini’s son (16). Then considering Krishna of
wonderful prowess as irrepressible he gave him up and made up his mind
for destroying Baladeva (17). O sinless one, at that time the Lord
introduced a new of play of leaping in pairs. And all of them engaged in
it (18). Krishna jumped with another milk-boy by name Sridāma and
Sangkarshana with Pralamva, O sinless one (19). The other milk-boys, of
inferior strength, began to leap with great force in the company of
their comrades (20). Krishna defeated Sridāma and Rohini’s son Pralamva
and other boys were vanquished by those of Krishna’s party (21).
Thereupon carrying on their shoulders the victorious those, who were
vanquished, came delightedly and quickly to the root of the Bhāndiraka
tree and soon reached their appointed quarter. And carrying on his
shoulders Baladeva, the foremost of Dānavas, Pralamva, began to proceed
quickly in an opposite direction like a cloud with the moon (22–23).
Being unable to carry the weight of the intelligent son of Rohini that
huge-bodied (demon) increased (his body) like a cloud attacked by Sakra
(24). Then that foremost of Danavas Pralamva displayed his own body huge
as the Bhandiraka fig-tree and effulgent like a mountain of burnt
collyrium (25). Then that huge-faced and huge-necked dreadful demon,
having eyes like unto the wheels of a car, a head adorned with a
sun-like coronet of five layers and resembling Death himself, shone like
a cloud attacked by the sun. The earth sank under the weight of his feet
(26-27). As Death carries away men sunk in the waves of the ocean, so
the great demon Pralamva, the foremost of heroes, adorned with long
garlands and other ornaments and clad in a long raiment, carried away
quickly and stealthily Rohini’s son like a cloud surcharged with water.
While thus carried away by him Sangkarshana shone there like the moon in
the sky carried by dreadful clouds (28–30). Beholding himself on the
shoulders of the demon the dreadful Sangkarshana began to cherish
suspicions in his mind and said to Krishna (31).

"O Krishna, I am being carried away by this Daitya huge like a mountain
and clad in a coat of mail who has displayed a great illusion and
assumed the form of a man (32). This wicked-minded Pralamva has grown
exceedingly in pride and his power has doubled itself. How shall I
vanquish him?" (33)

Krishna knew very well the character and strength of Rohini’s son and
therefore smilingly and quietly said to him in joyous words (34):–"O
god, thou art identical with the universe and art subtler than the
subtle. Thou art merely showing the conduct of a man (35). Do thou
meditate thy own Nārāyana form at the time of the revolution of the
worlds. Do thou now know of thy own true form and body (which thou didst
manifest at the time of the) union of the ancient Rishis, powerful on
account of their own faculties, of the oceans, Brahmā and water (36–37).
The sky is thy head, the water is thy form, the earth is thy
forgiveness, the fire is thy mouth, the life of all the worlds is thy
breath, the air is thy abode, and thy mind is the creator all (38). Thou
art of thousand faces, thousand limbs, thousand feet, thousand eyes,
thousand lotus-navels and thousand rays, and the slayer of thy enemies
(39). The celestials behold what thou didst display before. None can
find out what had not been said by thee before (40). Whatever is capable
of being known in this world thou hast made them all known. All the
celestials do not know what thou alone dost know (41). The deities see
thy own natural etherial form and worship that artificial form of thine,
begotten of thy own self (which thou didst assume in the golden age)
(42). The gods can not see thy end and therefore thou dost pass by the
appellation of Ananta.²¹⁶ Thou art alone subtle and beyond the
comprehension of the subtle (43). O god, thou art the pillar of this
universe. And stationed in thee this world, the source of the origin of
all creatures, is upholding all the regions (44). My body extends over
the four oceans²¹⁷ and thou hast instituted the division of the four
Varnas.²¹⁸ Thou art the lord of the four Yugas²¹⁹ and the eater of the
fruits of the four Hotras²²⁰ (45). Although we both are of one body, we
have assumed two different forms for protecting the universe, mobile and
immobile. As I am the Lord of the universe so thou art (46). I am the
eternal Krishna and thou art the ancient Sesha.²²¹ Thou art the
ever-existent god Sesha of the world. The world is upheld by our body
divided in twain (47). I am identical with thee and thou art at one with
me. Both of us are highly powerful and of one body (48). What is the
use, O God, of waiting like one having no sense? Do thou strike
forcibly, with thy fist, firm as a thunder-bolt, the head of this
Dānava, the enemy of the celestials" (49).

Vaishampayana said:—Hearing those words of Krishna and recollecting the
ancient history the mighty-armed son of Rohini was filled with his own
strength pervading the three worlds and with his well-formed fist
resembling a thunder-bolt struck the wicked Pralamva on the head
(50-51). His head, shorn of its fore part, entered into the body of the
Danava and he too, divested of his life, touched the ground with his
knees (52). Thereupon, with his body out-stretched on the ground
Pralamva looked like a cloud scattered on the sky (53). As streams of
water, mixed with various minerals, come out of the summit of a mountain
so blood came out of his body shorn of head (54).

Having thus slain Pralamva and withdrawn his own strength the powerful
son of Rohini embraced Krishna (55). Thereupon Krishna, along with the
gods stationed in the sky and milkmen began to chant the glories of the
highly powerful Baladeva with benedictory hymns bespeaking his victory
(56). In the sky was heard an invisible voice of the celestials
declaring "This Daitya has been by force killed by a boy of unwearied
actions" (57). Thus on that Daitya, irrepressible unto the deities,
being slain, the celestials, stationed in the sky, gave him the name
Baladeva after his action. Therefore all the worlds call him by the name
of Baladeva (58–59).

²¹⁵ The word in the text literally means the _bow of Indra_. According
 to the Hindu mythology the rain-bow is supposed to be the bow of
 Indra who is the presiding deity of rain and showers.

²¹⁶ Literally means one having no end. The God has no beginning or
 end.

²¹⁷ According to the Hindu mythology the world is bounded by the four
 oceans on the four sides. This figuratively refers to the
 universal form of the God.

²¹⁸ There are four principal _Varnas_ or castes, the _Brāhmanas_,
 _Kshatriyas_, _Vaisyas_ and _Sudras_. The Brāhmanas are said to
 have sprung from the mouth of Brahma and belong to the sacerdotal
 class. The Kshatriyas, or the military caste, are said to have
 arisen from His arms. The Vaisyas or the trading class are said to
 have sprung from His thighs and the Sudra or the servile class
 from His feet. The earliest reference to the origin of caste is
 seen in a hymn of the Rig-Veda called _Purusha Sukta_. There are
 various other accounts seen in the various Puranas.

²¹⁹ _Yuga_ is an age of the world of which there are four namely,
 Satya, Treta, Dwapara and Kali.

²²⁰ An article intended as fit for offering with fire. Burnt offering,
 oblation with fire.

²²¹ A name of Balaveda. It is also the name of the serpent-king, the
 thousand-headed snake who was the couch and canopy of Vishnu.