TITLE: SHALYA MEETS KALAYAVANA

Vaishampayana said:—Kālayavana, the king of Yavanas, was highly powerful
and used to govern the inhabitants of his city in pursuance of royal
duties (1). He was wise, conversant with three Vargas,²⁷⁴ proficient in
six Gunas²⁷⁵ innocent of sevenfold calamities,²⁷⁶ endued with all
accomplishments, well-versed in Srutis, pious, truthful, a master of his
senses, acquainted with the rules of war, an expert in capturing forts,
heroic, of great strength and used to honor his ministers. One day
encircled by his ministers he was seated at ease and the learned and
intelligent Yavanas, discoursing amongst themselves on various celestial
themes were adoring him (2–5). In the meantime there blew delightful,
but exciting, cold and fragrant wind. Thereat the assembled Yavanas and
the king Kālayavana were all worked up and thought "Whence it has come?"
Thereupon they saw a car coming from the south. It was golden and white,
lighted up with the lustre of jewels, adorned with celestial flags and
pennons, drawn by horses fleet like the mind or air, adorned with
tiger-skins, a terror to the enemies, the enhancer of joy to the
friends, constructed by the celestial Architect, effulgent like the sun,
the grinder of others’ cars and embellished with jems like the rays of
the sun and moon. The powerful and beautiful king of Soubha was seated
thereon. Delighted greatly at seeing his friend the mighty-armed king of
Yavanas, the foremost of speakers, repeatedly sent for Arghya and water
to wash feet. And rising up from his throne and with Arghya in his hands
he went out and waited at the landing stair of the car. Be holding the
king Kālayavana, powerful like Sakra the highly energetic Shalya was
greatly delighted, got down alone from the chariot with a confident
heart and joyously entered into the Palace of Yavana for seeing his
friend. Observing _arghya_ in the hands of the king of Yavanas, Shalya,
the foremost of kings, said in sweet words:—"O thou of great effulgence,
I am not now worthy of _arghya_. I am now an envoy of the kings and have
been despatched to thee by the intelligent Jarāsandha. I therefore do
not deserve _arghya_ from the kings" (5–18).

Kalayavana said:—"O you of large-arms, I know that you have been
despatched here as an envoy by the king of Magadha for the behoof of
kings (19). O intelligent king, I adore you duly with water to wash
feet, seat and various other means of welcome because you have been sent
here by the entire circle of kings. By adoring you, O king, I shall
worship the entire host of kings and by honoring you all of them will be
honored. Therefore, O king, sit with me on this throne" (20–21).

Vaishampāyana said:—Thereupon shaking hands with each other and
enquiring of their mutual welfare those two kings sat at ease on the
sacred throne (92).

Kalayavana said:—What has become impossible to him, depending on the
might of whose arms you kings are all living without any anxiety as the
gods do under the protection of Sachi’s lord, that he has sent you to
me. Tell me, truly, O king, what mandate, the powerful king of Magadha
has issued to me. Even if it be very difficult I shall carry out his
command (23-24).

Shalya said:—O king of Yavanas, hear I shall describe at length what the
king of Magadha has deputed me to communicate to you (25).

Jarasandha said:—The highly irrepressable Krishna has been oppressing
the world from his very birth. Informed of his wicked deeds I attempted
to slay him (26). Accompanied by a number of kings along with their
four-fold forces and conveyances I besieged the mount Gomanta with a
huge army (27). And there listening to the highly sensible words of the
king of Chedi I set fire to that best of mountains for their (Rāma and
Krishna’s) destruction (28). Beholding that fire consisting of hundreds
and thousands of flames and resembling the fire of dissolution, Rāma,
holding the golden hilt of a sword, leaped down from the mountain summit
in the midst of the ocean-like army of the kings. And that highly
irrepressible one began to kill the car-warriors, the infantry and
cavalry (30). He moved about like a serpent; and catching elephants,
horses and soldiers with his plough-share he grinded them with his mace
(31). In that battle-field abounding in hundreds of kings that highly
energetic Rāma, endued with the prowess of the sun, ranging in various
ways like the setting sun, destroyed elephants, with elephants,
car-warriors with cars, and the cavalry with horses (32-33). After Rāma,
the highly powerful and energetic Yadu hero, Krishna, taking up his
discus effulgent like the sun, and his black iron club, forcibly leaped
down in the midst of the enemie’s army agitating the mountain with the
force of his feet as a lion attacks the poor deer (34–35). O king, at
that time whirling and bathed with shower that mountain extinguished the
fire and entered into the earth as if dancing (36). Jumping down from
that burning mountain Janārddana with his hand holding the discus began
to destroy our army (37). Whirling his huge discus and throwing all down
with his club he began to grind men, elephants and horses with his mace
(38). Then with the fire of discus and plough-share begotten by their
anger that huge army, protected by sun-like kings, was consumed (39).
Within a moment our army consisting of men, elephants horses infantry
and flags, was consumed by those two foot soldiers (40).

O king, beholding that army distressed by the fear of the fire of discus
and routed, I, encircled by a huge collection of cars, engaged in
battle. And Keshava’s brother the heroic and valiant Baladeva, the
destroyer of Bala, stood before me with a club in his hand (41–42).
Having slain the twelve Akshouhinis of soldiers and cast off his
plough-share and mace Sounanda, that leonine hero pursued me with his
club (43). O king, having thrown the club on me with a force like that
of the fall of a thunder-bolt he again stood manfully on the ground
(44). Then like unto Kārtikeya at the time of the destruction of
Krounch, he, with his two large eyes, as if consumed me, looking at my
joints (45). O king of Yavanas, beholding such a form of Baladeva, what
person, having hopes of life, can stand before him in the battle-field
(46)? When he stood before him holding up that terrible club resembling
the rod of the Regent of the dead and whirling it along with his
plough-share Brahmā, the grand-father of all, filling the welkin with
his invisible voice grave as the muttering of clouds, said:—"O sinless
Rāma, do not strike (him); O holder of plough-share, it has been
destined that he shall not meet with his death from any other person."
Hearing with my own ears those words given vent to by the Grand-father I
was filled with anxiety and returned from the battle-field (47–50).

O king, for this reason, and for the behoof of the kings, I communicated
this incident to you. Hearing this you should do what you think proper
in pursuance of my words (51). Desirous of having a son your father
propitiated Sankara, the god of gods with hard austerities and obtained
you as his son unslayable by the princes of Mathurā (52). Fasting and
feeding on powdered iron for twelve years the great Muni Gārgya
propitiated the great god Siva, on whose lotus feet even the gods and
Asuras meditate and therefore obtained his wished-for prosperity in the
person of yourself (53). By virtue of the asceticism of the ascetic
Gārgya and of the power of Mahādeva carrying the emblem of a crescent
forsooth, shall Janārddana meet with his death as the dews are dried up
by the rays of the sun (54), O king, thus requested by the kings, be up
and doing and march for vanquishing Krishna. And entering the city of
Mathurā with your army establish your glory there (55). Vasudeva’s son
is a native of Mathurā and Baladeva is his brother. If you go to the
city of Mathurā you will be able to defeat them in battle (56).

Shalya said:—O king, I have thus communicated to you, the message
entrusted to me by the Emperor Jarāsandha for the behoof of the kings.
Do you now undertake what is proper and conducive to your well-being
after consulting duly with your ministers (57).

²⁷⁴ Three conditions of a king or state; prosperity, evenness or decay
 or loss, gain and equality.

²⁷⁵ The six acts of a king in his military character, or peace, war,
 marching, halting, sowing, dissension, seeking potection.

²⁷⁶ The seven calamities are gambling, sleeping in a day, calumny,
 whoring, playing, idle roaming, drinking and hunting.