TITLE: KRISHNA’S CHILDREN

Vaishampāyana said:–0 reverend Sir, of the many thousand wives of
Krishna you have duly mentioned the names of eight. Do you now give an
account of their children (1).

Vaishampāyana said:—Eight queens of Krishna had been recognised as
leading ones. They all gave birth to heroic sons. Listen to an account
of the names of their children (2). (Krishna’s principal wives were)
Rukshmini, Satyabhāmā, Nagnajiti, Sudattā, Saivyā, Lakshmanā,
Mitravindā, Kālindi, Jāmvavati, Pouravi, Subhimā, Mādri and others.
Amongst them, hear of the names of the sons of Rukshmini (3–4).
Rukshmini first gave birth to a son by name Pradyumna who killed
Shamvara. Next she gave birth to the mighty car-warrior Chārudeshna, the
scion of the Vrishni race, and afterwards to Chāruchandra, Chārugarbha,
Sudangstra, Druma, Sushena, Chārugupta, the powerful Chāruvinda and the
youngest Chāruvāhu. Besides she gave birth to a daughter by name
Chārumati. Garudadhwaja (Krishna) begat on Satyabhama, seven sons,
namely, Bhānu, Bhimaratha, Kshupa, Rohita, Diptimān, Tāmrajaksha, and
Jalāntaka and four daughters, namely Bhānu, Bhimarikā, Tāndrapaksha and
Jalandhama. Jamvavati gave birth to a son, the ornament of the
battle-field, by name Sāmva, as also to Mitravān, Mitravinda, Mitravāhu
and Sunitha and a daughter by name Mitravati. Hear now of the children
of Nagnajiti (5-10). She gave birth to two sons, Bhadrakāra and
Bhadravinda and a daughter, by name Bhadravati. Saivyā gave birth to
Sangrāmajit, Satyajit, Senajit, Shura and Sapatnijit. The princes
Vrikāshwa, Vrikanirvitti, Vrikadipti and Subhimā were Madri’s sons. O
king, hear now of the children of Lakshmanā. Gātravān, Gātragupta and
the powerful Gātravinda were born with their youngest sister Gātravati.
Kālindi gave birth to a pious son by name Asruta whom Madhusudana gave
to Shrutasenā. Having given that son away Hrishikesha delightedly said
to his wife: "For long he will be the son of you both." Vrihati gave
birth to Gada. Saivyā gave birth to Angada, Kumada, Sweta and a daughter
by the name of Swetā. Sudevā gave birth to five sons by name Avagāha,
Sumitra, Suchi, Chitraratha and Chitrasena and a daughter by name
Chitravati. Besides Vanastambha, Stambha and Stambhavāna were born to
him as sons. Of them Vanasthambha begat Mitrasena and Stambhavati.
Upāsangha begat two sons, Vajrāsu and Kshipra. Koushiki, Sutasoma, and
Youdhisthiri gave birth to Yudhisthira, the wonderful warrior Kāpāli and
Garuda (11-20).

Thus the sons of Mādhava numbered one lak and eighty thousand. They were
all valiant and expert in fighting. O king, I have thus narrated the
progeny of Janārddana (21–22).

O foremost of kings, Pradyumna begat on the Vidarbha princess a son by
name Aniruddha. He had the emblem of a deer on his flag and no body
could obstruct him in battle (23). Baladeva begat on Revati two sons by
name Nishatha and Ulmuka. Those two brothers were beautiful like gods.
Shura’s son Vasudeva begat on his two wives Sutanu and Nārāchi two sons
by name Poundra and Kapila. Of them Nārāchi gave birth to Kapila and
Sutanu to Paundra. Of those two sons Poundra became the king and Kapila
entered into woods. Vasudeva begat on Sudrā the highly powerful hero
Jara who was a great archer. Vasudeva begat on Kāshi a quick-coursing
son by name Supārshwa. Aniruddha had two sons, Sānu and Vajrā of whom
the latter was the eldest. Vajra begat Pratiratha whose son was Suchāru.
Amitra, the youngest son of Vrishni, begat Sini whose sons were Satyavāk
and the great car-warrior Satyaka. The heroic Yuyudhāna was Satyaka’s
son. Yuyudhana’s son was Asanga whose son was Tuni. Tuni’s son was
Yugandhara. With him, O king, the family ends (24–31).