TITLE: KAISHIKA WORSHIPS KRISHNA

Janamejaya said:—O lord, having slain the highly powerful Kansa
irrepressible unto the gods Krishna did not sit on the throne. Then he
waited for the maiden and was not welcomed there. Why did he show
forgiveness although thus insulted (1-2). Vinatā’s son was highly
powerful. Why did he too show forgiveness? O Brahman, I am greatly
stricken with curiosity to listen to all this. Do thou describe it at
length (3).

Vaishampāyana said:—When with Vinatā’s son the eternal Vāsudeva arrived
at the city of Vidarbha Kaishika thought thus about him in his
mind:—(4). "Forsooth shall our sins be destroyed if we behold the
wonderful Abhisheka of Krishna (5). And from Krishna who has seen the
true essence of things our mind will also be purified. Besides there is
no other worthier person in the three worlds than the lotus-eyed
Janārddana, Krishna, the king of gods. O kings, what hospitality can we
offer to him obtaining such a person? However virtue will not be
spoiled?" Thus thinking the two brothers Kratha and Kaishika desired to
go to Keshava in order to confer upon him their kingdom. Approaching
that god and bending low their heads unto him, the two heroic and noble
kings of Vidarbha, said: "Blessed is our birth and fame to-day; blessed
are our ancestral manes since thou hast come to our house. (6-10). We
ourselves, our umbrellas, flag-staffs, throne, army and our flourishing
city belong to thee (11). O thou of large arms, formerly thou wert
annointed by Indra as Upendra. We now install thee in in our kingdom
(12). The innumerable kings and even the Emperor Jarāsandha will not be
able to undo what both of us will do (13). The highly effulgent king
Jarāsandha, who offers shelter to other kings, is thy enemy. And he
always mentions in a conversation ’Devaki’s son has not been installed
on a throne and he has no city. How will he sit in the same assembly
with the kings (14–15)? The highly effulgent and powerful Krishna too is
very proud. He will therefore never come to this Swayamvara for the
maiden (16). When all the kings will sit on their respective seats, how
will that highly effulgent one sit on a lower seat (17)?’ Hearing this
discussion amongst the kings and in order to put a stop to the
dissension the king Bhishmaka, after consulting with us, has got ready
this most excellent resting house for the thee. O thou of great
effulgence, thou art the prime deity amongst the gods and art the lord
of all the worlds. Do thou behave now as the Emperor in this land of
mortals. O lord, may not difficulties about seats arise in the assembly
of kings (18–20). Having performed today the ceremony of royal unction
according to rites laid down in scriptures, do thou, next morning,
seated at ease on an auspicious throne, in the city of Vidarbha, be
installed as the Emperor of the kings assembled at the behest of Indra
(21–22)."

Having said this to that foremost of celestials and bowing unto him with
folded-hands those two heroes sent an emissary to the kings (23). As
Vāsava, the holder of thunderbolt, announced through the celestial
emissary so Kaishika announced this intelligence to the assembled kings
(24).

Kaishika said:—O ye kings, you all know that the eternal Hari has
arrived at the city of Vidarbha, along with Vinata’s son, as our guest
(25). Beholding the worthiest person, to whom a gift could be made,
present my eldest brother Kratha, with a view to acquire piety, has
conferred upon Vasudeva his kingdom (26). When my brother said "Sit on
this seat" an invisible speech was uttered by a sky-ranger (27).

The celestial emissary said:—"O king, thou shouldst not offer to
Vāsudeva the seat on which thou didst sit. For him the king of gods has
sent this white seat of gold, constructed by the celestial Architect,
crested with all sorts of jems and marked with an emblem of a lion
(28–29). Do thou along with other kings place him on this seat and
sprinkle him (30). He, who amongst the kings assembled in this city of
Kundina for the maiden will not come, will be slain by the king of gods
(31). The eight jars, born of the portions of Nidhis made of celestial
gold and jewels and containing celestial ornaments belonging to the
high-souled lord of riches, will come amongst those kings for installing
this Emperor (32–33). O king, this order of the lord of gods is
communicated to thee. Do thou invite all the kings with a letter and
perform the royal unction of Keshava (34)."

Kaishika continued:—"O kings, saying this from the welkin and giving to
Krishna, the seat, effulgent like the rising sun the celestial emissary
returns to the city of gods (35). I therefore speak to the assembled
kings, that they should all behold Janārddana of a wonderful form rare
in the land of mortals whom the king of gods has recognised as dreadful
and greatly irrepressible and whom he will sprinkle from the welkin with
jars (36–37). If we behold the wonderful ceremony, the bathing of
Vishnu, the God of gods, surely our sins will be dissipated (38). Come,
O ye leading kings, you need not fear, for you I have made peace with
Janārddana (39). I have known truly that Krishna’s mind is pure. He will
never make enmity with lords of men (40). Besides he cherishes no enmity
towards the king of Magadha at heart. You should therefore consult and
do whatever is proper in this matter (41)".

Vaishampāyana said:—O king, hearing the words of Kaishika, while the
kings were thinking in fear of a curse, they heard again that an
invisible voice, grave like the muttering of a cloud, filling up the sky
with its sound, said at the mandate of the king of gods (42-43).

Chitrangada said:—"O ye kings, Sakra, the king of the three worlds, for
your well-being and for governing the subjects has issued this mandate
(44). O kings, you should not live creating enmity with Krishna.
Pleasing him do you all live in your respective kingdoms (45). Krishna
removes the calamity of his votaries, and is like the fire of
dissolution unto his enemies. Therefore creating friendship with him be
you all happy and freed of anxiety (46). A king is the lord of men; the
celestials are the lords of kings; Indra is the lord of celestials and
Janārddana is the lord of Indra (47). The powerful Lord Vishnu, the God
of gods, is born as a man in the land of men under the name of Krishna
(48). He alone, in the worlds, is not to be slain by the gods, Dānavas,
men and even by Mahadeva, the holder of trident along with Kumāra²⁷³
(49). What to speak of others, I myself along with the celestials wish
to perform the _Abhisheka_ ceremony of the high-souled Keshava, the king
of gods (50). Besides, the gods have no hand in the _Abhisheka_ ceremony
of an Emperor; the kings are entitled to it. I cannot perform the royal
unction of Keshava, adored of all the worlds (51): O ye kings, do you
repair to the city of Vidarbha, and holding a consultation with Kratha
and Kaishika perform the ceremony as laid down in Scriptures (52). O
kings, thinking that the time for making peace and friendship has
arrived, Vāsava has sent me to you. I am the celestial emissary (53).
To-day the kings Kratha and Kaishika have invited Krishna to the city of
Vidarbha for performing the ceremony of his royal unction. United with
them, do ye, O kings, perform the _Abhisheka_ ceremony of Krishna. And
then taking gifts do you, with delighted hearts, return to the
Swayamvara (54–55). Let the four leading kings Jarāsandha, Sunitha, the
mighty car-warrior, Rukshivān and Shālwa, the king of Soubha, wait here
so that the sporting-ground may not remain vacant (56)".

Vaishampayana said:—Listening to the command of the king of gods
announced by Chitrāngada all the kings desired to go there. And the
intelligent king Jarasandha too accorded his permission. And they set
out encircled by their own armies and headed by Bhishmaka (57–58).
Surrounded by his own followers, and with his heart burning in anxiety,
the mighty-armed king Bhishmaka, along with other kings, went to where
the large-armed Krishna was living in the house of Kaishika. They saw
from distance the brilliance of the picturesque assembly-hall of the
celestials that had been brought there for Krishna’s Abhisheka, and
which was decorated with flags, pennons and garlands, set with celestial
gems; adorned with celestial garlands, streamers and ornaments, perfumed
with celestial fragrance and encircled by celestial conveyances. There,
the Apsarās, Vidyādharas, Gandharvas, Munis and Kinnaras, stationed in
the welkin, were singing the accomplishments of Krishna, the lord of
celestials. And the great saints and Siddhas were eulogising him. And
celestial trumpets were beaten of themselves in the sky (59–65). And the
immortals, stationed in the sky, showered profusely scented powders made
of roots, barks, flowers and fruits of Mandāra, Pārijāta, Santānaka,
Kalpa and Harichandana trees (66). Seated on his own vehicle, the Lord
of Sachi himself came there with the gods and showed himself in the sky
(67). Stationed in their respective quarters, the Eight Regents began to
sing, dance and eulogise (Krishna’s) glories on all sides (68). Hearing
that tumultuous sound and having their eyes expanded in surprise, the
kings entered into the assembly-hall (69). The large-armed and powerful
king Kaishika came out and received them duly (70). When the arrival of
the kings was announced to the beautiful Hari, the foremost of the
celestials, he issued out with the performance of all benedictory rites
(71). Thereupon from the sky, celestial jars, with pieces of cloth tied
round their necks and covered with mango leaves, began to pour down,
like clouds, water mixed with gold, gems, flowers and scented powders on
the occasion of the ceremony of his royal unction (72–73). Having
performed duly according to rites, the Abhisheka ceremony of Janārddana,
before the very presence of the kings, the king of gods adorned him with
celestial ornaments (74). Having welcomed duly all the kings with
celestial garments of various colors, garlands and unguents, Mādhava too
sat in the auspicious assembly-hall of the celestials for the purpose of
bathing. The kings of the Yadu and Vidarbha races began to adore him
(75-76). The powerful son of Vinatā, capable of assuming forms at will,
sat on a seat on the right hand side of Keshava (77). As desired by
Vasudeva himself the high-souled and heroic kings, Kratha and Kaishika,
sat on their respective seats on his left hand side (78). The highly
powerful and heroic car-warriors headed by Sātyaki of the Vrishni and
Andhaka races sat on his left hand side (79). As the gods beautify the
Lord of Sachi-so those leading kings beautified the beautiful Krishna
seated at ease on a celestial seat covered with a celestial coverlet and
effulgent like the sun (80). Afterwards having been introduced to him by
the ministers, various other kings were duly received by Keshava and
they too sat at ease on their respective thrones. Thereupon having shown
him proper respect, the highly wise king Kaishika, the foremost of
speakers and well-read in all Shāstras, said:—

"O lord, considering thee a human being, these ignorant kings have
committed offence by thee. Do thou therefore forgive them, O God."

Krishna said:—"O Kaishika, what of kings observant of Kshatriyas’
duties, even if any one else proves inimical to me it does not find room
in my heart even for a single day. O kings, how can I be offended with
them who have to turn their faces against impiety and to fight
virtuously? What is past is gone. Those who are dead have gone to the
celestial region. Birth and death are natural with men. Do not grieve, O
kings, for them who are dead. I wish that you may all forgive me and
cast off your enmity (81-87)".

Vaishampāyana said:—Having consoled the kings with these words, the
highly effulgent Madhusudana looked at Kaishika and desisted (88). In
the meantime, showing proper respect to all, Bhishmaka, the foremost of
speakers, and of those well read in Polity, said (89).

²⁷³ The son of Mahādeva, Kārtikeya, the commander-in-chief of the
 gods, who led the life of a bachelor.