TITLE: ACCOUNT OF BRAHMADATTA AND THE STRANGE BIRD

Markandeya said:—After the disappearance of that deity and according to
the words of that lord, I acquired discriminative knowledge along with
celestial vision (1). Thereupon, O son of Gangā, I saw at Kurukshetra,
all those Brāhmanas, the descendants of Koushika of whom that lord
(Sanatkumār) spoke to me (2). Of them the seventh Brāhmana became the
king Brahmadatta. By his name, character and action he also became
celebrated by the name Pitridatta (3). In an excellent city by name
Kāmpilya, the foremost of kings Anuha begat that monarch on Suka’s
daughter Kritvi (4).

Bhishma said:—O king, hear I shall describe the family of that king as
recounted by the highly regenerate great Rishi Mārkandeya (5).

Yudhisthira said:—Whose son was Anuha, the foremost of the pious? In
what age was he born? How powerful was he? Whose son was the highly
illustrious king Brahmadatta? How did the seventh Brāhmana become a king
(6-7)? (Certainly) the self-controlled, omnipotent sage Suka, respected
by all the world, did not give away his illustrious daughter Kritvi to
an effeminate person (8). O thou of great effulgence, I wish to hear at
length the account of Brahmadatta; it behoves thee to describe it (9).
Do thou describe unto me how the Brāhmanas, mentioned by Mārkandeya, are
living in the world (10).

Bhishma said:—I have heard that this king (Brahmadatta) was contemporary
of my grand-father the royal saint Pratipa (II). The noble ascetic
Brahmadatta, the foremost of royal saints, was grateful unto all
creatures and engaged in their well-being (12). He made (that division
of the Vedas) which is called _Sikshā_⁴¹ by means of his Tapas and
instituted an order of study. The highly illustrious teacher of Yoga,
Gālava, was his friend and the ascetic Kandarik was his minister (13).
In another birth they all help each other. As narrated by the noble and
great ascetic Mārkandeya they, in the seventh birth, were all gifted
with unlimited energy (14). Hear, O king, I shall describe to you the
ancient family of the high-souled king Brahmadatta born in the race of
Puru (16).

The pious son of Vrihatkshetra was celebrated by the name of Suhotra.
Suhotra’s son was known by the name of Hasti (16). By him in the days of
yore the most excellent city of Hastināpur was founded. Hasti had three
highly pious sons (17). Of them the eldest was Ajāmida, the second
Dwimida and the youngest Paramida. Ajāmida begat on Dhumini the king
Vrihadishu whose son was the highly illustrious Vrihaddhanu (18). His
son Vrihadbharma was known as a highly pious king. His son was Satyajit
whose son was Viswajit (19). His son was the king Senajit who had four
sons celebrated in the world (20). Ruchira, Swetaketu, Mahim nāra and
Vatsa, the king of Avanti—these were his four sons (21). Ruchira’s son
was the highly illustrious Prithusena whose son was Pāra, from whom was
born Neepa (22). Neepa had a hundred sons who all were of unlimited
energy, mighty car-warriors, heroic and powerful. All these kings were
known by the name of Neepa (23). The illustrious descendant of those
Neepas was known as Samara in the Province of Kāmpilya. He was greatly
fond of Dar (24). Samara had three sons—Para, Pāra and Sadashwa, who
were all greatly pious. Para’s son was Prithu (25). Prithu’s son was
Sukrita, who, by good actions, was endued with all accomplishments. His
son was Vibhrāja (26). His son was the king Anuha. He was the
illustrious son-in-law of Suka and the husband of Kritvi (27). Anuha’s
son was the royal saint Brahmadatta. His son was the ascetic Viswaksena,
the subduer of foes (28). By his own actions Vibhrāja was again born (as
the son of Brahmadatta). He had another son by the name of Sarvasena
(29). His eyes, O king, were torn by a sparrow known by the name of
Pujanyā (worshipful) that lived in the house of Brahmadatta for a long
time (30). Brahmadatta had an other highly powerful son by the name of
Viswaksena (31). His son was the king Dandasena. His son was Bhattata
who was formerly killed by Karna (32). This son of Dandasena was heroic
and perpetuated his race. O Yudhishthira, Bhattata’s son was evil-minded
(33). O king, he brought about the fall of the house of Neepas. For him
all the Neepas were destroyed by Ugrayudha (34). I have killed
Ugrāyudha, in battle, on account of his being elated with pride. He was
proud and took delight in haughtiness and sinful ways (35).

Yudhisthira said:—Whose son was Ugrayudha? And in whose family was he
born? For what did you kill him? Tell me all this (36).

Bhishma said:—Ajamida’s son was the learned king Yavinara. His son was
Dhritimān whose son was Satyadhriti (37). His son was the powerful
Dridanemi whose son was the king Sudharmā (38). His son was the king
Sārvabhouma. He was the only Lord Paramount of the world and was
(therefore) called Sārvabhouma (39). In his family was born Mahān, the
descendant of Puru. Mahān’s son was known as the king Rukmaratha (40).
His son was the king Supārshwa, whose son was the pious Sumati (41). His
son was the virtuous-souled and powerful Sannati. His son was the
valiant king Krita (42). He was the disciple of the high-souled
Hiranyanābha. By him the Sanhita of the Sāma Veda has been sung in
twenty-four ways (43). For this reason the western Saman and the
chanters thereof are known under the appellation of Kārti. Krita’s son
was the heroic Ugrayudha, born in the race of Puru (44). By displaying
his prowess he slew the highly energetic king of Pānchala, Neepa by
name, the grand-father of Prishata (45). Ugrāyudha’s son was the highly
illustrious king Kshemya, whose son was Suvira and whose son was
Nripanjaya (46). From Nripanjaya was born Vahuratha—all these kings are
called Pauravas. O my son, Ugrayudha grew highly vicious (47). Having
burnt down all the Neepas he brought about their extinction. Slaying all
the Neepas and other kings he was filled with pride (48). After the
death of my father he told me (many) sinful words. O king, while I was
lying down on earth encircled by my courtiers Ugrāyudha’s messenger came
to me and said:—"O foremost of Kurus, do thou give me thy illustrious
mother Gandhakāli, the jewel of a female, as my wife (49–50). Forsooth
shall I confer upon thee a prosperous kingdom and riches. I have
acquired jewels, according to my desire, on earth (51). O descendant of
Bharata, by merely hearing of this my effulgent and irrepressible discus
or at the very sight of it the enemies fly away from the field of battle
(52). If dost thou seek thy kingdom, life and the well-being of thy
family, obey my command or else thou shalt have no peace" (53).

I heard these words resembling the flames of fire from the messenger
despatched by him while I was lying down on earth on a Kuçā bed (54). O
undeteriorating one, thus informed of the desire of that vicious-minded
one, I ordered my commander-in-chief to undertake a war (55). As
Vichitravirja was a boy and under my protection, I was filled with rage
and made up my mind for engaging in a war (56). But, O sinless one, all
my ministers, well-versed in counsels, the god-like Ritwikas,
well-meaning friends and companions well-read in scriptures, all
requested me to desist and pointed out sound reasonings too (57–58).

The ministers said:—"O lord, this vicious-souled (Ugrāvudha) is carrying
on the work of devastation and thou, too, art impure.⁴² So thou shouldst
not undertake a war as thy first work (59). We shall first resort to the
expedients of conciliation, gifts and sowing dissension. And afterwards
when thou shalt be pure,⁴³ thou shouldst bow unto the gods, make the
Brāhmanas perform benedictorv rites and then having saluted them and
obtained their permission, thou shouldst set out for victory (60–61). It
has been laid down by the elderly sages that a man, when he is in
mourning, should not take up a weapon or enter into a contract (62).
First thou shouldst try the expedient of conciliation and gift and then
try to sow dissension. And afterwards thou shouldst slay him,
manifesting thy prowess, as Indra killed (the demon) Samvara (63). O
king, the words of the elderly sages should be obeyed in proper time."
Hearing this I desisted from fightlng (64).

Thereupon those ministers, well-versed in counsels, tried all the
expedients. O foremost of Kurus, at that time the most excellent work
began (65). Although solicited by the expedients of conciliation and
others settled upon by the sages that wicked-minded one was not won over
(66). Though the discus of that sinful one was set in motion, it
immediately stopped on account of his longing for others’ wives (67). .
I did not perceive then that his most excellent discus had stopped,
which, spoken ill of by the pious, had been rendered abortive by its own
action (68). Then being purified and having benedictorv rites performed
by the Brāhmanas, I set out from the city in a car with my bow and
arrows and engaged in a fight with my enemy (69). Thereupon encountering
the army strengthened by weapons there took place a mad fight which
lasted for three days like that between the gods and demons (70). When
the battle raged to its highest pitch, that hero, consumed completely by
the might of my weapons, gave up his ghost and fell down with his face
downwards (71). In the meantime, O my son, Prishata started for the
province of Kāmpilya. On the king Neepa and Ugrayudha being slain that
highly effulgent one obtained his ancestral kingdom Ahichhatra. O king,
he was the father of king Drupada and an ally of mine (72–73).
Afterwards having defeated Drupada by force in battle, Arjuna conferred
the province of Kāmpilya together with that of Ahichchatra on Drona
(74). Having accepted both the kingdom, Drona, the foremost of victors,
gave away Kāmpilya to Drupada. This is known to you (75). I have thus
described to you in detail the race of Brahmadatta, the ancestor of
Drupada and that of the hero Ugrāyudha (76).

Yudhisthira said:—O son of Gangā, why did the bird Pujanya put out the
eyes of the eldest son of the Brahmadatta (77)? She lived for a long
time in his house. Why did she (then) commit such a mischief by that
high-souled king (78)? Why did Pujanya contract friendship with him? Do
thou duly satisfy all these my doubts (79).

Bhishma said:—O Emperor! O Yudhishthira! hear in due order what took
place formerly in the house of Brahmadatta (80), O king, a certain
female bird was the companion of Brahmadatta. Her two wings were white,
head red and back and abdomen were black (81). Brahmadatta was greatly
attached to that female companion. O best of men, she made a nest in his
house and lived there (82). She every day used to go out of the palace
and roam at large on the bank of ocean, in lakes and ponds (83). Having
ranged over the rivers, mountains, woods, pleasure gardens, ponds
perfumed with fragrant white water-lilies and places the air whereof is
impregnated with the perfume of lilies and lotuses and abounding in
swans, Sārasas and Kārandavas, she used to come back in the night to the
city of Kāmpilya and live in the house of the intelligent king
Brahmadatta (84–86). O king, whatever strange things she saw in her
peregenations in various parts of the country, she used to describe them
to the king in her conversation in the night. O descendant of Kuru, once
on a time a son, the foremost of kings, was born to Brahmadatta,
celebrated by the name of Sarvasena. Pujanyā also gave birth to an egg
there (87–89). In time that egg opened and thence came out a lump of
flesh with legs, arms and face (90). O king, its face was tawny coloured
and had no eyes. Gradually that young one got its eyes and its wings
grew a little (91). Pujanyā used to love equally her young one and the
Prince, and gradually became fond of them (92). And she every evening
used to pick up with her beaks two ambrosial fruits for (the prince)
Sarvasena and her young one (93). Brahmadatta’s son and the young one
delightedly lived upon those two fruits (94). By daily partaking of
those fruits they began to grow up. When during the day Pujanyā used to
go away the nurse gave play to Brahmadatta’s son in the company of that
young one of the bird (95–96). When Pujanyā went out of the nest the
Prince used to take away that young sparrow for play (97). Once on a
time the Prince held fast the young bird by the neck for which, O king,
it immediately died (98). Beholding the young bird set free a little
with its mouth wide open, that had been killed by the boy, the king was
greatly sorry and remonstrated with the nurse. He was filled with great
grief for that young sparrow (97-100). Pujanyā too, who used to range in
the forest, came at that time to the palace of Brahmadatta with two
fruits (101). Coming there she saw the child, that came out of her body,
dead (102). Beholding her dead young one she at first lost consciousness
but afterwards gradually regained it. Regaining her consciousness the
poor bird began to bewail (103).

Pujanyā said:—"O my child, when I used to come back to my nest emitting
my cries you were wont to come to me with your thousand indistinct
accents (104). Why do you not come to me to-day with your mouth open,
yellow face and black throat (105)? I always cry embracing you with my
wings. Why do I not hear to-day your inarticulate sound (106)? I had
always this desire that some day or other I shall see my young one
begging water with its mouth open and shaking its wings (107). That
desire of mine is now frustrated with your death." Having thus bewailed
in various ways she said to the king (108). "O king, you are a
Kshatriya,⁴⁴ you know the eternal ways of religion. Then why have you
got my young one slain by the nurse (109) O wretch of a Kshasriya, why
did your son take away my young one and kill it? Methinks, you have not
listened to Sruti of Angiras (110). One who seeks shelter, one who is
hungry, one who is assailed by his enemies and one who lives for ever in
his house should be protected by a man (111). He who neglects this duty
goes without any doubt to the hell Kumbhipāka. How can the deities and
the manes accept Havi and food consecrated with Swadha mantras offered
by him (112)?"

Having thus said to the great king, (the bird), stricken with grief and
possessed by ten-fold⁴⁵ characteristics, tore off the eyes of the boy
(113). Thereupon the eyes of the prince were put out. Having thus
blinded him the bird Pujanyā flew away into the sky (114).

Thereupon beholding his own son the king said to the bird:—"Renounce
your grief, O auspicious one. You have done well, O timid bird. (115).
Give up your sorrow and come back; may your friendship become
everlasting. Live in my city and enjoy. May good betide you (16). For
the misfortune of my son I have not the least anger for you. Be my
friend. May you fare well. You have done your duty (117)." Pujanyā
said:—"I know how much love you have for your son like me. Making your
son blind I do not wish to live here (118). Hear I shall recount the
themes narrated by the preceptor Sukra. ’One should always leave at a
distance a bad friend, a bad country, a bad son and a bad wife. There
can be no friendship for an evil friend and attachment for a bad wife.
One cannot expect Pinda from: a bad son and one cannot rely on a bad
king (119-120). Who can trust a bad friend? One cannot live in a bad
country. People are always afraid of a bad king and a bad son always
brings on misery (121). That wretch of a man, who being weak and having
none to protect him, confides in a man who does him injury, does not
live long (122). Do not trust a faithless man and do not place too much
confidence even on a man who is faithful. Fear, begotten by confidence,
destroys all the roots (123). That stupid man, who serves a man and
confides in a low caste, does not survive long (124). As earthworms are
devoured by birds as soon as they are born, so men, obtaining
advancement from a king, undoubtedly meet with destruction soon (125).
As a creeper destroys a huge tree so even a learned man, resorting to
mildness of nature and destroying his body, daily brings about the
destruction of his enemies (126). An enemy, first becoming mild,
delicate and emaciated, gradually makes the body lean and then kills us
as an earth-worm gradually eradicates a tree (127). Having made this
promise in the presence of the ascetics ’I shall not destroy anybody’
Hari, afterwards, O king, killed Namuchi with a foam (128). A man
destroys his enemy either with poison, fire or water whether he be
asleep, drunk or careless (129) In fear of future enmity men do not
leave the remnant of enemies. Remembering this, example, O king, they
bring about the entire extermination of their enemies (130)’".

O king, the remnant of enemies, debt and fire, becomes again united and
assumes proportion. Therefore the remnant of these three should never be
kept (131). An enemy laughs, talks, takes food from the same plate, sits
on the same seat, but he always keeps in mind that sin (132). Even
contracting a relationship with an enemy one should not trust him. The
king of gods, though himself a son-in-law, killed Puloma (133). As a
deer does not approach a hunter so a wise man should not near him who
speaks sweet words keeping enmity at heart (134). It is not proper to
live near an enemy who has prospered. He brings about our destruction as
a river destroys a tree (135). Even obtaining advancement from an enemy
one should not trust him. Securing prosperity from him one meets with
destruction like an earth-worm (136). Learned persons, who are to
protect themselves, should always keep in mind these verses chanted by
the preceptor Sukra, O king, (137). By making your son blind I have
committed a great iniquity so I place no confidence in you (138).

Having said all this the bird at once flew up into the sky. I have thus
O king, described to you, what took place formerly between Pujanyā and
the king Brahmadatta. O highly intelligent one, O Yudhisthira, I shall
describe to you the ancient history of Srādha as accosted by you which
was recounted by Sanatkumar in response to a question from Mārkandeya
(139-141). O king, hear what happened in the days of yore to Gālava,
Kundarika and Brahmadatta the three Brahmacharins in their seventh birth
who longed for the fruit of Srāddha and good actions (142-143).

⁴¹ This is one of the parts of Vedanga—a sacred science, considered
 as subordinate to and in some sense a part of the Vedas; six
 sciences come under this denomination; _Siksha_ or the science of
 pronounciation and articulation; _Kalpa_, the detail of religious
 ceremonies; _Vyakarana_ or grammar; _Chhandas_, prosody;
 _Jyotish_, astronomy; and _Nirukta_, or the explanation of the
 difficult and obscure words and phrases that occur in the Vedas.

⁴² _i.e._ Thou art in mourning on account of the death of thy father.

⁴³ After the performance of thy father’s Srāddha.

⁴⁴ The word in the text is _Murdhābhisikta_. Literally it means _on
 whose head water is sprinkled_. The Kshatriyas go through this
 ceremony at the time of installation.

⁴⁵ _i.e._ Those of a drunkard, a madman, of one exhausted with
 fatigue, hungry, angry, hasty, of one afraid, stupified and
 passionate.