TITLE: AN ACCOUNT OF INDRA-YAJNA

Vaishampayana said:—Thus ranging and sporting in the forest Krishna and
Baladeva spent the two²²² months of the rainy season (1). Thereupon
returning to Vraja those two heroic brothers heard that arrangements
were being made for performing a _Yajna_ in honor of Indra and that the
milkmen were busily engaged in merriments (2). Seeing this, Krishna,
filled with curiosity, asked "What is that Sakra sacrifice for which you
are all filled with delight?" (3) Amongst them an elderly milk-man
replied:—"Hear, why Indra’s flag is worshipped (4). O subduer of thy
enemies, Indra, the king of the celestials and the lord of the world, is
the master of clouds. For this reason from time immemorial and coming
down from one family to another, this festival is being celebrated (5).
Commanded by him and embellished by his bow the clouds produce corns
with new showers of rain (6). Pleased with witnessing this festival the
Lord Purandara, the giver of clouds and water, and the partaker of many
sacrifices, brings about the gratification of the entire world (7). We
and other men live by the corns produced by him and the celestials are
also gratified thereby (8). Corns grow up when the king of gods sends
down showers. And when the earth is gratified with oblations the whole
universe appears as if full of ambrosia (9). Fed by the grass produced
by him the kine, with the bulls and calves, have attained to nourishment
and easiness (10). Wherever the cloud, pouring down water, is seen,
there is observed neither a piece of ground shorn of grass and corns nor
an hungry animal (11). The nectarine rays, of the sun that are milched
by the Lord Sakra, are discharged by the clouds in the form of
ambrosia-like showers of rain (12). The mighty leonine roar, announced
by the air, which he emits with force from the clouds, is designated by
the people as the muttering of clouds (13). The terrible sound, that he
sends forth when carried by clouds accompanied by the wind, is heard
like the clap of a thunder-bolt that shatters the mountains (14). O my
child, as the great Lord Siva is encircled by the goblins, so Indra,
surrounded by clouds coursing at will, and stationed in the sky, sends
down showers accompanied by the clap of a thunder-bolt (15). Sometimes
resembling an unfair day, sometimes resembling scattered gold, sometimes
resembling collyrium and sometimes pouring water in drops the clouds
paint the sky. Thus extracting water from the earth through the rays of
the sun, Indra, the giver of water, sends it down again on earth for the
behoof of all creatures (16–18).²²³ For these reasons O Krishna, this
rainy season has been fixed upon as the time for worshipping Indra. The
kings and others men with delight worship Indra in the rainy season. We
too do so (19)".

²²² In India the year is divided into six seasons of two months each.

²²³ This shows that the ancient Hindus were not ignorant of the
 scientific formation of clouds.

CHAPTER LXXI.²²⁴ KRISHNA PROTESTS AGAINST INDRA-YAJNA: AN ACCOUNT OF
AUTUMN.

Vaishampayana said:—Hearing the words of the aged milk-men regarding the
festivity of Indra, Dāmodara well-informed of Sakra’s might, said to him
(1). "We are all milk-men who range in the forest. The precious kine
constitute our subsistence. We should therefore worship the kine, the
mountains and the forests (2). Cultivation is the means of subsistence
to the cultivators, merchandise is to the merchants and the cow is the
best means of livelihood to us. This has been laid down by the scholars
well-read in the three Vedas (3). The respective profession of each
caste is their great God, is worshipful, adorable and beneficial unto
them. He, who, benefitted by one, worships another, is visited by two
fold calamities in this world, and in the next after death. The fields
are protected by cultivation, the forests are preserved by fields and
the mountains are supported by forests and these mountains are our only
refuge. I have heard that the mountains, which exist in this forest,
assume forms at their will. And adopting various shapes they sport in
their table-lands (4–6). Sometimes assuming the forms of tigers, the
foremost of those having claws or those of lions adorned with manes,
they frighten those who devastate the forest and thus protect their
respective woods (7). When tribes living in the forest²²⁵ or those
obtaining their livelihood through it²²⁶ disfigure a wood, they, with
their work of eating up manliness, destroy them in no time (8). The
Brāhmanas perform _Yajnas_ wherein the _Mantras_ play an important part,
the cultivators should perform a sacrifice in honor of a furrow and we
milk-men should celebrate one in honor of the mountains. Therefore we
should worship the mountains in the forest (9). Methinks, therefore, O
milk-men, that engaged in celebrating a Yajna in honor of the mountains
do ye engage in actions after your own hearts either at the foot of a
tree or of a mountain (10). Digging wells and setting up sheds in that
auspicious place and slaying beasts of sacrifice let the milk-men carry
on their festivity. There is no need of holding a discussion over it
(11). Circumambulating that best of mountains embellished with autumnal
flowers the kine will again return to Vraja (12). Every one is filled
with delight in this charming autumn shorn of clouds, endued with many
virtues and abounding in delicious water affording satisfaction to the
kine and in grass (13). Somewhere rendered white by blossoming Pryaka
flowers and somewhere made dark blue by Bānasanas the forest, abounding
in full-grown grass and shorn of peacocks, is appearing greatly
beautiful (14). Clear clouds, shorn of water and lightnings, are moving
in the sky like a herd of elephants (15). The trees, enveloped with new
grown foliage, are as if being pleased by the continual muttering of
clouds drawing in new water (16). Having the white cloud for its
head-gear, fanned by the swan-like chowries and with the full-moon for
its umbrella the sky is shining like a newly installed king (17). After
the termination of the rainy season all the tanks and pools are as if
smiling with the rows of swans. And as if filled with the cries of
Sārasas, they are daily decreasing in size (18). The rivers, flowing
towards the ocean having the Chakravakas for their breast, the banks for
their waist and the swans for their smiles, are as if going to their
husbands (19). The water, beautified by the full blown lilies and the
sky crested with stars, as if mock each other in the night (20).
Beholding the highly charming forest resonant with the notes of
Kraunchas and blued with the ripe Kalama paddy one attains to delight of
mind (21). The tanks, pools, lakes and rivers and fields, embellished
with blossoming trees, are appearing highly beautiful (22). Copper
coloured and dark-blue lotuses are appearing in the beauty of new water
(23). The peacocks are freed of haughtiness, the sky is divested of
clouds, the oceans are full of water and the wind is gradually assuming
proportions (24). The earth is appearing as if of many eyes by the
feathers cast off by the peacocks after their dancing in the rainy
season (25). With her banks full of mud and covered with Kāsa flowers
and creepers and abounding in swans and Sārasas the river Yamunā is
appearing highly beautiful (26). Ranging in fields filled with corns
ripened in proper season and in the forest, the birds, living on corns
and water, are emitting notes in excitement (27). The tender corns, on
which the clouds poured their watery contents in the rainy season, have
grown hardened (28). Casting off his cloudy raiment and illumined by the
autumn the moon is, as if, ranging with a delighted heart, in the clear
sky (29). Now the kine have been yielding milk in double the quantity,
the bulls have become two-fold maddened, the forest has become twice
beautiful and the earth has become highly accomplished with corns (30).
The luminous bodies, divested of clouds, the water beautified with
lotuses, and the mind of men are daily becoming delightful (31).
Divested of clouds and shining in autumnal effulgence the sun, of
powerful rays, is spreading its lustre on all sides and drawing the
water (32). Having excited their respective armies the kings, the
protectors of the world, desirous of achieving victory, are proceeding
against one another (33). The variegated and charming woods, with the
mud dried up and reddened by _Vandhujiva_ flowers, are creating the
delight of the mind (34). The blossoming Asana, Saptaparna and Kānchana
trees are beautifying the forest (35). Vānāsana, Dantivitapa, Pryaka
Svarnaparna, and Ketaki trees have been covered with flowers and the
she-owls and black-bees are moving about hither and thither (36). As if
assuming the beauty of a harlot the autumnal season is walking in Vraja
and cow-sheds filled with the sound of churning rods (37). The foremost
of the celestials (Vishnu), having the emblem of Garuda on his flag, was
happily sleeping during the rainy season. The deities are now trying to
awaken him (38).

"O ye milk-men, in this autumn abounding in beautiful corns, we will
worship the foremost of mountains, resembling the abode of the wind-god,
resorted to by white, red and blue birds, filled with fruits like clouds
adorned with the bow of Indra, crested with groves of creepers and trees
and adorned with expansive table-lands. We will, in particular, worship
the kine (39–41). Adorning the cows with ear-rings, horns, chaplets of
peacock feathers, bells hanging around their necks and autumnal flowers,
do ye worship them for your well-being. And let the _yajna_, in honor of
the mountain, be undertaken. We will celebrate a _yajna_ in honor of the
mountain as Sakra is worshipped by the celestials. And forsooth we will
compel you to perform the _yajna_ for the cows. If you have any love for
me, and if I am your friend, then do ye all worship the kine. Do not
cherish any doubt in this. If you cherish these my conciliating words,
you will meet with your well-being. Therefore without questioning its
purpose do ye fulfill my words" (42-45).

²²⁴ In this Chapter it will be seen that Krishna attempts to put a
 stop to Indra-Yajna or a sacrifice in honor of the god of rain. It
 is evident from the manner in which he preaches against it that he
 was opposed to lifeless rituals and ceremonials. He exhorts all
 the people of his clan to believe that every body’s calling, on
 which depends his livelihood, is a god to him. He was not for
 useless ceremonies and rituals and always tried to present before
 his country a higher form of faith, freed from the prevailing
 superstitions. But he introduced it in a very mild form and for
 this he did not revolutionize the existing modes of things. This
 his stand against Indra-Yajna, and his introduction of the worship
 of mountain, forest &c ultimately developed itself into the great
 religion of _Duty_ which he preached in his after life. To worship
 one’s own means of livelihood, when stripped off metaphor, means
 to perform one’s own duty considering it as sacred as the worship
 of a deity. This incident of introducing a new form of religion
 also proves his superhuman power. Being a mere boy he produced so
 great an influence over his people that they left off their
 established form of religion and followed him.

²²⁵ The Bheels or other barbarous tribes who live in the forest.

²²⁶ The milk-men or others who obtain their means of livelihood either
 by tending their kine in the forest or selling the produce of the
 forest.