TITLE: RUKSHMI ATTACKS KRISHNA AND IS DEFEATED

Vaishampāyana said:—Hearing that his sister had been carried away by
Krishna Rukshmi, filled with anger, promised before Bhishmaka saying "I
shall not return to the city of Kundina without slaying Krishna and
bringing back Rukshmini" (1–2). Saying this in anger the heroic Rukshmi
get upon a car abounding in dreadful weapons and flags. And surrounded
by a large army he speedily set out (3). Bhishmaka’s sons, the foremost
of car-warriors, Krātha, Angshuman Shrutarvā, the valiant Venudāri, the
kings of Deccan and other mighty car-warriors, headed by Kratha and
Kaishika followed him (4-5). Having wended a great distance in anger
they saw Govinda with his beloved wife near the river Narmada (6).
Having kept his army there proud Rukshmi, in order to fight a duel of
cars, went to the slayer of Madhu and pierced him with sixty four
sharpened arrows. Janārddana too wounded him in return with seventy
arrows (7-8). Although Rukshmi was very careful the highly powerful and
valiant Mādhava cut off the standard of his car and the head of his
charioteer from his body (6). Seeing him in difficulty the kings of
Deccan, bent upon killing him, encircled Janārddana (10). The mighty
armed Anshumāna struck him with ten arrows Shutarvā with five and
Venudāri with seven (11).

Thereupon when the energetic Govinda wounded the breast of Angshuman
that king, in pain, sat down on his car (12). Thereafter having slain
with four shafts the four horses of Shrutarvā Mādhava cut down
Venudāri’s standard and and wounded his right arm (13). The very next
moment he wounded Shrutava with five arrows who, in great-pain, sat
down, holding the standard of the car (14).

While Vāsudeva began thus to make a downpour of arrows, all the mighty
car-warriors, Krātha, Kaishika and others ran towards him (15).
Janārddana, in anger, cut off their arrows with his own. And although
they were very careful he wounded them all (16). Having wounded all
those kings with sixty four arrows that highly powerful one ran towards
other angry kings (17). Beholding his army taking to their heels
Rukshmi, filled with anger, wounded Keshava on the breast with five
sharpened arrows, his charioteer with three such shafts and sundered his
standard with a bent one (18-19). Piercing in anger, Rukshmi with sixty
arrows Keshava cut off his bow although he was very careful (20). Taking
up another such bow the energetic Rukshmi began to discharge celestial
weapons for killing Keshava (21). Counteracting his weapons with his own
the highly powerful Mādhava again cut off his bow and car with three
arrows (22). Thus having his bow and car sundered the heroic and valiant
king Rukshmi, taking up his sword and shield, jumped down from the car
(23). Beholding him thus leap down Keshava, in anger, cut off his sword
which fell down on the battle-field and pierced his breast with three
winged arrows (24). Thereupon the mighty-armed king Rukshmi, resounding
the whole earth, fell down unconscious like a mighty demon struck down
by a thunderbolt (55). Thereupon Keshava began to assail other kings
with his arrows. They however, beholding Rukshmi fallen, took to their
heels (26).

Beholding her brother lying down motionless on earth, Rukshmini, for his
life, fell at Vishnu’s feet (27). Keshava took up her, embraced and
consoled her. And then promising safety to Rukshmi he set out for his
own city (28).

On the other hand having vanquished Jarāsandha and others, the Vrishnis,
headed by Rāma, gladly set out for Dwarka (29). After the departure of
the lotus-eyed Keshava Shutarvā came to the battle-field, placed Rukshmi
on his own car and took him to his own city (30). Being unable to bring
back his sister and seeing his promise broken the haughty and sensitive
Rukshmi did not like to enter into the city of Kundina (31). For his
residence he built another city in the province of Bidharbha which is
celebrated on earth under the name of Bhojakata (32). Residing in that
city the highly powerful Rukshmi began to govern the southern districts
and the mighty-armed king Bhishmaka lived in the city of Kundina (33).
When Rāma, with the Vrishni army, arrived at Dwārakā the powerful
Keshavā duly espoused Rukshmini (34). Thereupon as did Rāma lively
happily with Sitā, as Purandara lived with Sachi, Puloma’s daughter so
he enjoyed in the company of his sweet partner (35). That beautiful,
good natured and chaste Rukshmini, endued with all accomplishments, was
the first wife of Krishna (36). The powerful Mādhava begat on her ten
sons—all mighty car-warriors, namely the highly powerful Pradyumna,
Chārudeshna, Sudeshna, Sushena, Charugupta, the valiant Charuvaha,
Chāruvinda, Suchāru, Bhadracharu and Chāru, the foremost of the strong
and a daughter by name Chārumati. They were all masters of weapons,
dreadful in battle and well read in religious lore and political science
(37-39). The mighty-armed Madhusudana married seven other beautiful and
accomplished maidens born in high families, namely Kālindi, Mitravinda,
Satya, the daughter of Nagnajita the king of Ayodhyā, Jāmvavati, the
daughter of Jāmvavan, Rohini capable of assuming forms at will, the
good-natured daughter of Madra king, Lakshmanā of fair eyes and
Satrājita’s daughter Satyabhāmā. Besides Gāndhāri, the daughter of
Shavya, like unto an Apsarā in beauty, was his another queen.
Hrishikesha, of unlimited prowess, simultaneously married sixteen
thousand maidens and enjoyed in their company simultaneously. They were
all used to luxuries and were honored with precious dresses and
ornaments of all sorts as they desired. And thousands of highly powerful
and great sons, whom Mādhava begat on them, were all great car-warriors,
endued with great strength, masters of all weapons and performers of
sacrifices and religious rites (40-45).