TITLE: A DESCRIPTION OF THE MOUNT GOMANTA

Vaishampayana said:—Thereupon drinking the milk of the sacrificial cow
along with Bhrigu’s descendant the two foremost of speakers and Yādavas
Rāma and Keshava, endued with the gait of infuriated elephants proud of
their strength, set out by the path pointed out by Jāmadghni for
beholding the mount Gomanta (1–2). As the gods beautify the celestial
region so those two heroes, with Jāmadagnya as the third, beautified the
road like three fires (3). As the gods come to the mount Mandara, so
they, passing over the road frequented by men, reached the mount Gomanta
in the evening. It was covered with charming creepers, adorned with
various trees, scented with incense, variegated with a row of beautiful
peacocks, entirely filled with bees, and rocks abounding in trees, and
resonant with the notes of peacocks imitating the muttering of clouds
(4–6). The summits of that mountain were attached to the sky, the trees
were covered with clouds, the rocks were scratched with the tusks of the
infuriated elephants, the places around the water-fall were covered with
green grass and creepers and were resonant with the notes of birds
(7–8). With dark-blue rocks that foremost of mountains assumed various
colours like a cloud. Its body was besmeared with metalic discharges. It
was adorned with table-lands and springs, was filled with beautiful
celestials like the mount Maināka coursing at will, was elevated and of
high summits. Its base was filled with water. Its caves were adorned
with forest, and white clouds and covered with, Panasa, mango, Amrataka,
cane, Syandana, sandal, Hintāla, Tamala and Ela woods. It was adorned
with Marichakshupa, Pippali, Inguda, Sāla, Nimva, Arjuna, Pātali and
Ponnaga trees. The water was adorned with water-born lotuses and the
ground with ground-born ones. It was adorned with Drumashanda, Jamva,
and Jamvula trees and completely embellished with Kanda, Kandala,
Champaka, Ashoka, Vilwa, Tinduka, Kutaja and Naga flowers. It was filled
with elephants and deer-herds. The spacious valleys of that foremost of
mountains were resorted to by Siddhas, Chāranas and Rakshasas, the rocks
were continually filled with Vidyadharas, and echoed with the roars of
lions and tigers. It was sprinkled with currents of water and adorned
with moon trees. That mountain was highly spoken of by the gods and
Gandharvas, adorned with Apsaras and covered with flowers of celestial
trees. Its summits had no experience of the strokes of Indra’s thunder,
forest-fire and fear of high winds. The tops of the summits were
beautified with streams of powerful water-falls and shone greatly with
the beauty of water and moss. All the passages were inhabited by deer
and the sides of that best of mountains were adorned with rocks
dark-blue like clouds. As the wives beautify a husband so it was
beautified by forests abounding in gentle trees covered with blossoming
flowers. At some places its summits, beautified with caves and forests
like a man with his wife, burning in effulgence with herbs and inhabited
by ascetics, it appeared as if it was adorned with artificial golden
forests. It appeared as if with its spacious root and rising summit that
mountain was agitating the earth and the sky (9-27).

Having reached the charming mount Gomanta, the three immortal-like
heroes felt a desire for living there (28). Thereupon as the birds rise
high up into the sky so like Vinatā’s son with their course not
obstructed any where they, with great force and power, got upon that
best of mountains (29). Ascending like gods that most excellent summit
of the mountain, they, without any delay, built a habitation there after
their own heart (30).

Seeing the Yadavas stationed on the summit of the mountain the great son
of Jamadagni, Rāma, with a view to express his liberal views said
(31):—"O my child lord Krishna, I shall now repair to the city of
Surpāraka. Even if you enter upon a battle with the gods you will not be
defeated (32). O Mādhava, by the delight that I acquired on the way by
your following me, this my immortal body has been blessed (33). The
battle, in which you will acquire the weapons and which is intended for
the after-life behoof of the kings, as ordained by the gods, shall take
place here (34). O Vishnu, O Krishna, eulogised by the gods and the
foremost of men do thou listen to the moral words of men in general
(35). This present battle with Jarāsandha, as ordained by Time, is the
first instalment of thy human actions which thou hast begun to perform
in the world assuming a human form (36–37). Do thou thyself, O Krishna,
by thy own power, hold thy weapon and assume thy form terrible in battle
(38). When thou shalt, with thy uplifted discus and mace, stand in the
battle-field, beholding thy well-formed eight arms even the king of gods
will be stricken with fear (39). O foremost of the pious, as settled in
the city of the celestials from to-day commences thy march for
establishing thy glory in the world in the interest of the gods (40). O
foremost of speakers, O large-armed Govinda, do thou speedily send for
Vinatās son for waiting on the flag staff of thy car (41). For the
kings, whose object of life is to fight under the subjection of
Dhritarashtra’s sons, are waiting for battle as if with their faces
turned towards the city of the celestials (42). As if beholding the
future destruction of the kings, possessed by widowhood and with one
braid of hairs the Earth is waiting for thee (43). O Krishna, O thou the
slayer of thy enemies, when assuming a human form thou shalt be present
in the battle-field the Kshatryas, possessed by hostile stars, without
shrinking, will assume a joyous attitude (44). Therefore O Mādhava, do
thou soon engage in fight for grinding the host of Dānavas, for the
attainment of the celestial region by the kings and the happiness of the
gods (45). O Krishna, honored by thee who art honored by the universe I
consider myself honored by the entire world, mobile and immobile (46). O
thou of large arms, forsooth thou shalt remember me when thou wilt fight
with the assembled kings. I shall endeavour for the accomplishment of
thy object (47)."

Having said this to Krishna who never experiences weariness in work, and
showered blessings on him Jamadagni’s son Rāma set out for his
wished-for quarter (48).