TITLE: KROUSTHU’S FAMILY

Vaishampayana said:–Krousthu had two wives Gāndhri and Madri; of them
Gāndhari gave birth to the highly powerful Anamitra and Mādri to
Yudhājit and Devamidusha. There came into being three offshoots of the
Vrishni race, (1-2). Mādri’s son begat two sons Vrishni and Andhaka.
Vrishni’s sons were Shaphalka and Chitraka (3). Wherever, O king, the
virtuous souled Shaphalka lived there existed no fear of disease or of
draught (4). O foremost Bharatas, once on a time Indra, the god of rain,
poured no showers in the territories of the king of Kāshi for three
years (5). The king accordingly brought the reverend Shaphalka to his
kingdom. In consequence of his living there Indra showered rain (6).
Shaphalka obtained as his wife Gāndini the daughter of the king of
Kāshi. She every day used to distribute kine amongst the Brāhmanas (7).
She lived in her mother’s womb for many years. For her living in her
mother’s womb for many years, her father said to her:—"Be born very
soon. May you farewell, why do you live there?" The daughter from the
womb replied "I shall daily give away a cow. If you agree to this I
shall take my birth." The father, saying "So be it," satisfied the
wishes of his daughter (8-10). Shaphalka begat on Gāndini the heroic and
liberal Akrura, who was well read in Shastras, celebrated many Yajnas,
gave away many presents and was fond of guests (11). Upāsanja, Shadgu,
Mridara, Arimejaya, Arikshipta, Upeksha, Shatrughna, Arimarddana,
Dharmadhrik, Yatidharmā, Gidhramoja, Andhaka, Avāhu, and Prativahu were
Akrura’s brothers. And the beautiful Sundari was his sister (12–13).

O descendant of Kuru, Akrura begat on Sugātri the daughter of Ugrasena,
Prasena and Upadeva powerful like the celestials (14) Prithu, Viprithu,
Ashwagriva, Ashwavāhu, Supārshwaka, Gaveshi, Aristhanemi, Ashwa,
Sudharmā, Dharmavrit, Suvāhu and Vahuvāhu were the sons of Akrura’s
brother Chitraka. He had also two daughters by name Shravishtā and
Sravanā. Kroushthu’s third son Devamidusha begat on Ashmaki a son by
name Shura. He begat ten sons on his Bhoja queen (15–17). Amongst them
the mighty armed Vasudeva, surnamed Anākadunduvi was born first. At the
time of his birth bugles were sounded in heaven and the great sound of
kettle-drums arose on earth. A great shower of flowers took place at the
house of Shura. Vasudeva’s beauty was matchless in the world of men.
That foremost of men was beautiful like the moon (18–20). Then were born
in order Devabhāga, Devashravā, Anādrishti, Kanavaka, Vatsavān,
Grinjima, Shyāma, Shamika and Gandusha. These were the ten sons of
Shura. Besides he had five beautiful daughters, namely Prithukirti,
Prithu, Shrātadevā, Shrutashravā and Rājādhidevi. Every one of them gave
birth to heroic sons. O descendant of Kuru, the king Kunti wanted Prithā
(21–23). Therefore Shura conferred her on the aged and worshipful
Kuntibhoja. On her thus being adopted by Kuntibhoja she passed by the
name of Kunti (24). Anta begat Jagrehu on Shrutadeva. The king of Chedi
begat on Shrutashrava the highly powerful Shishupala (25). He was in his
previous birth the Daitya king Hiranyakashipu. Vriddhasharmā begat on
Prithukirti the highly powerful hero Dantavakra the king of Karusha.
Kuntibhoja adopted Prithā as his daughter. Pāndu married her (26–27).
Dharma begat on her the pious Yudhishthira, Vāyu (Wind-god) begat
Bhimasena and Indra the foremost of heroes Dhananjaya,⁵⁹ equally
powerful like him and celebrated in the world. From Anamitra, the
youngest of Vrishni’s sons was born Shini (28–29). His son was Satyaka
whose sons were Yuyudhāna and Sātyaki. Yuyudhāna’s son was Asanga whose
son was Bhumi. His son was Yugandhara with whom the family ended. The
great Uddhava was Devabhāga’s son. He was known as the foremost of the
learned and was illustrious like a celestial (30–31). Anadhrishthi begat
on his wife Ashmaki an illustrious son by name Nivartashatru. Devashravā
begat a son by name Shatrughna (32). Devashravā’s son Ekalavya was
brought up by Nishādas⁶⁰ and was accordingly called Naishādi (33).
Vatsavān had no issue and therefore Shura’s son the powerful Vasudeva
gave him his own be gotten heroic son Koushika (34). Gandusha too had no
issue and therefore Vishwaksena gave him his four sons namely
Chārudeshna, Suchāru, Pānchāla and Kritalakshmana (35). The heroic
(Chārudeshna) never used to come back from a battle without fighting. O
foremost of men, the large-armed Roukshmineya was the youngest of all
(36). Whenever he used to travel thousands of crows followed him with
the hope "We shall feed upon the sweet meat of various animals slain by
Chārudeshna" (37). Kanavaka had two sons Tantrija and Tantripāla.
Avagrinjima had two sons Vira and Ashwahanu. Both of them were heroes.
Shyāma’s sons were Sumitra and Shamika. The latter obtained the kingdom.
He considered himself unworthy for being the king of one province and
accordingly undertook the celebration of a Rājashuya⁶¹ sacrifice
(38–39). Having secured the help of Yudhishthira who had no enemies he
slew all his foes. Hear, I shall now describe the descendants of
Vasudeva (40). He who meditates on this very powerful threefold Vrishni
race consisting of many branches is never visited by any misfortune in
this world (41).

⁵⁹ Another name of Arjuna. He was named so because he defeated the
 god of riches, Kuvera.

⁶⁰ A low caste people.

⁶¹ It is a religious ceremony which only an Emperor can perform when
 he becomes Lord Paramount after subjugating all the Powers. The
 king Shamika was not satisfied with his being the king of one
 Province only.