TITLE: DEATH OF ARISTHA

Vaishampayana said:—One day in the first part of the night while Krishna
was sporting, the dark-hued Dānava, Aristha by name, assuming the form
of an infuriated bull and resembling Death himself, was seen there
terrifying all the inmates of the cow-sheds (1). His body was like
extinguished ember and cloud, his horns were sharpened, his eyes were
effulgent like the sun, his feet were endued with sharpened hoops and
his hump was extremely hard (2). He was repeatedly licking his lips with
his tongue and moving his tail with pride. And for breaking down many
palaces with his hump it became exceedingly hardened (3). Incapable of
being repulsed on account of his own huge body, with his body covered
with excreta and urine, that Dānava, of huge waist, fleshy mouth, hard
knees and long abdomen, terrified all the cows with his skin hanging
from his neck and horns (4-5). That Daitya Aristha, of huge body, the
slayer of inimical bulls and the injurer of the cows, assuming the form
of a bull, was running about in the cow-sheds and pasture grounds. His
face was marked with strokes against the trees and his horns were
adorned as if for a fight (6-7). He used to approach the kine, when big
with their young ones and cause abortion and used to know them
immediately after their delivery (8). Without fighting with the bulls
and cows that irrepressible, and dreadful Daitya, always intent on
striking them with his horns, could not derive pleasure in pasture
grounds (9).

Accidentally on that day, the proud bull, under the influence of
Vaivaswān (the regent of the departed), came before Keshava (10).
Divesting the cow-sheds of bulls, calves and young bulls that one,
elated with proud, used to assail the kine (11). At that time, that one
of wicked soul, under influence of Vaivaswān, terrified the cows that
were near Krishna roaring like a cloud accompanied by Indra’s
thunderbolt. Thereat striking his palms and setting up a leonine shout
Govinda ran after him, increasing the anger of the demon in the shape of
a bull. Beholding Krishna and enraged with the sound of the strokes of
his palms against his arms, moving his tail and expanding his eyes in
delight that bull issued out a shout expressing his desire for fight.
Beholding that wicked demon of the form of a bull approach Krishna did
not move out from where he stood and rather remain there firm like a
mountain (12-15). With a view to slay Krishna, that bull too, raising up
his face and aiming at his belly, came there quickly (16). Vasudeva,
resembling a bull, confronted that irrepressible and collyruim-like bull
before him (17). As a bull faces a huge bull so Arishtha met Krishna and
from his nostril came out foams with a sound (18). Thereupon Krishna and
the bull confronting each other they appeared like two clouds, touching
each other in the rains (19). Placing his feet on the space between the
horns Krishna humiliated his pride and struck him at the neck resembling
the sky (20). Then uprooting his left horn resembling the rod of Yama he
struck him on the face with it; thereat that foremost of bulls breathed
his last (21). With his horns, head and shoulders shattered that demon
fell down vomiting blood like a cloud sending down showers (22).

Thereupon beholding the proud Dānava in the shape of a bull slain by
Govinda all the people began to eulogise him exclaiming "Well done! Well
done!" (23). Slaying that bull demon in that moon light the lotus-eyed
Upendra again engaged in sport (24). Like the immortals adoring their
king in the celestial region the Gopas began to worship delightedly the
lotus-eyed Krishna.