TITLE: THE COLLOQUY BETWEEN NARADA AND INDRA REGARDING THE

TRANSPLANTATION OF THE PARIJATA.

Vaishampāyana said:—The sage Narada then repaired to the residence of
Mahendra; and there he passed the night in witnessing the festivities
(held in honor of Siva) (1). The illustrious Adityas, the best of gods,
the Vasus, the learned Rajarshis who had attained to paradise through
their meritorious deeds (2), the Nagas, the Yakshas, the Siddhas, the
Charanas, the sages of ascetic austerities, Brahmharsis by thousands,
Devarshis and Moonies (3), the high-souled Saparnas, the highly powerful
Marutas, and hundreds of other divine creatures were assembled there
(4). The god Maheswara of immeasurable energy, accompanied by Uma and
surrounded by his attendants sat at the head of them all (5). That
protector of all creatures was surrounded also by those foremost of the
Devarshis who suffer no decay even at the end of thousands of Kalpas,
(6) who are worshipped by gods equal to Indra, are possessed of
self-knowledge, free from pride and who ever tread the path of rectitude
(7). The Rudras the progeny of Kasyapa, Skanda, the god of fire, that
best of rivers Ganga, Archisman, Tamburu, Bharisa, that foremost of
eloquent speakers, those possessed of the ascetic merit, and such other
leaders of the divine host, then O Bharata, adored that supreme god Siva
(8–9). O ruler of men, other gods devoted to religious ways and
austerities and followers of the path of the pious,—followed their
above-named leaders (i.e., offered homages to Siva), (10). O king, those
men who desirous of good, worship the gods on earth, those men are in
their turned worshipped in heaven by the immortals desirous of securing
good (11). O descendant of the Kouravas, those men versed in the Vedas,
who live according to the ordinances of the Sastras and who adore the
gods in the performance of their religious ceremonies for the benefit of
their ancestral manes, those are held in high estimation in the next
world by the gods (12). O ruler of men, there the illustrious
Chitraratha, the king of the Gandharvas together with his son,
delightfully played upon the heavenly musical instruments (13). Urnayu,
Chitrasena, Hahahuhu, Dumbara, Tamvura and other Gandharvas sang the six
different harmonies (14). Urvasi, Viprachiti, Hemā, Rambhā, Hemadantā
Ghritachi, and Sahajanyā and other damsels then performed numerous kinds
of dances there (15). The self-possessed illustrious Siva accepted these
homages with pleasure, and that lord of the world pleased with these
worshipful acts of Sakra, went back to his own residence (16).

On the departure of that lord of the created beings, the kings
(assembled there) returned to the places whence they came; the gods also
honored by Mahendra repaired to their respective abodes (17). When
everybody had gone away and Purandara was seated comfortably with his
own courtiers, the sage Narada approached him (18). Rising from his
seat, Indra received that sage of ascetic wealth, and offered him a seat
made of Kusa grass equal to that of his own (19). Thereafter the highly
powerful Narada said these words to Mahendra:—"O foremost of immortals,
know me now to be the messenger from Vishnu of matchless might (20). I
have been despatched here by that illustrious one of immense powers on a
mission that will remove one of his causes of pain" (21). Thereupon
greeting the sage with sweet and agreeable words, the illustrious
Pākasasana said with delight (22):—"O sage, tell me without delay what
has that foremost of men said; it is after a long time that the
high-souled Krishna has remembered us (23)".

Narada said:—O Mahendra, on some business of mine, I went to Dwarka to
see your younger brother Upendra that enhancer of the glory of the
Kasyapas (24). I found that subduer of his foes, that hero seated on the
Raivataka mountain in company with his wife Rukshmini and offering
eulogies to the God having the bull for his emblem (25). I gave him then
the flower of the Parijata tree, O sinless ruler of the gods, in order
that he may astonish his wives therewith (26). At the sight of that
flower, the production of the best of trees that bestows all desires,
the wives of Kesava were greatly astonished (27). O bestower of honor, I
related to them the qualities of that flower and the creation of the
Parijata tree by the high-souled Kasyapa (28). (I related to them) how
the self-controlled Kasyapa bound by the neck with a garland of flowers
was given away to me by Aditi for the sake of her _Punyaka_ vow (29);
how you were given away; by Sachi, and how similarly other gods were
given away and O lord of the gods, how Kasyupa and other mighty sages
obtained their release, by having paid their ransom (30). On hearing
these from me, one very dear wife of your younger brother, named
Satyabhāmā, made up her mind to perform the _Punyaka_ vow (31). O lord
of the immortals, O bestower of honor, that queen then entreated her
husband to help her in the performance of that vow, and your younger
brother had pledged himself to that effect (32). O chief of the gods 1
now hear attentively as I speak, all that Vishnu that foremost of
powerful beings, said to me then to convey to you (33). With due
deference, your younger brother, Achyuta who deserves all indulgence at
your hands has said to you:—"O foremost of the gods! it behoves thee to
give me that first and excellent of trees, Parijāta (34). Let, O slayer
of the Asuras, the desire of thy sister-in-law be fulfilled; specially O
foremost of the gods, as she is bent on a religious deed (35). O lord of
created beings, the people of heaven have had the privilege of looking
upon that blessed tree; now let the human beings of the earth be blessed
with a sight of it through my instrumentality (36)."

Vaishampāyana said:—O delighter of your race I having heard the words of
Vasudeva’s son, Mahendra said these words to Narada that foremost of
eloquent speakers (37): "O foremost of the twice-born ones: take thy
seat; thou hast spoken aright and properly; I shall entrust thee with a
return message for Vishnu of matchless powers (38). On Narada resuming
his seat, Sakra also, with the former’s permission seated himself down
on a seat similar to that of Narada (39). Thus seated, the lord of the
gods that slayer of Virtra, cast a glance on his own magnificence²⁸⁸ and
filled with delight thus addressed the sage Narada (40)".

Indra said:—Mighty and pious sage! After the usual enquiry regarding his
health and welfare, Janārddana, that source of happiness to all
creatures should be informed of these words of mine by thyself
(41):—"There is not the shadow of a doubt that leaving me, thou art the
lord of the worlds. O infallible one, the Parijāta and all other
precious possessions of heaven are thine own (42). O divine one, thou
hast sojourned to the earth only for relieving her of her burden, and
thou art behaving thyself in the human way only for the sake of the
success of thy mission (43). When after the fulfilment of thy earthly
mission thou shalt return to heaven, I shall fulfill, O Adhokshaja, all
the cherished desires of thy (beloved) wife (44). O Kesava, it is not at
all proper to take the precious things of heaven down to earth merely
for the sake of a trifle, and this has been the long-standing practice
(45). If, O mighty lord, I trangress this long-standing rule obtaining
in heaven, what shall the Prajapatis themselves say (46)? The
high-souled Brahman with his sons and grandsons hath established
permanent rules regarding all actions in the worlds (47). If I venture
to walk beyond the path thus laid down by Prajapati Brahman, surely that
intelligent lord when apprised of my transgressions will hurl down
curses on me (48). If we ourselves break through these bindings of the
standing customs then the Daityas and their partisans, as well as others
will violate it without the slightest hesitation (49). If for the sake
of thy wife thou takest the excellent Pārijāta down to earth, then, O
bestower of honor, the inhabitants of heaven will be much depressed
(50). O sage, let my brother, seeing the course of the times, be
satisfied with those luxuries only which the uncreate Brahman has
ordained for the enjoyment of the human kind (51). O sire, whatever
possessions I have got in heaven, Krishna is at liberty to enjoy them
when he remains here (52). Janārddana is filled with the arrogance that
attends those who eat rich dishes of meat, and therefore it is that he
is following the course of sin, leaving virtue aside (53). Born as a man
in the human world, the conduct of Krishna towards me his elder
brother,—this conduct which he offers me under the influence of his
wife—would surely, O Nārada, in my opinion redound much to his discredit
(54–55). This seizure of the precious possessions of heaven will be a
direct insult to me; and insult offered by the relatives is all the more
disgraceful. (56). Let the slayer of Madhu enjoy in succession, virtue,
wealth and desire, those possessions of the pious ordained by the
lotus-born Brahman (57). If I were to allow this Pārijāta tree to be
taken down to earth, who will, even commencing with the daughter of
Puloma, pay me the slightest regard (58)? Moreover, seeing and touching
the Pārijāta tree on the face of the earth, men will no longer endeavour
for the attainment of Heaven, as they will then enjoy the blessings of
heaven on earth itself (59). O Nārada, if the mortals enjoy the
blessings of the Pārijāta tree, what difference there will be then
between themselves and the gods (60)? The acts which men do on earth,
they enjoy those acts here; now if they be blessed with the possession
of the Pārijāta, they will no longer exert themselves for attaining
heaven (61). O sage! Pārijāta is the best of all the precious
possessions of heaven, and it is the glory of heaven; this glory
removed, the earth with its mortals will be as good as heaven with its
immortals (62). Obtaining as they will, the blessings of heaven on the
face of the earth, men will not celebrate sacrifices, nor will they
perform acts of pious liberality, having been easily raised to the
status of the immortals (63). Now, O sage, mortals, out of a desire for
attaining heaven, gratify ourselves by reverentially performing
sacrifices, _Japas_ and _Anhikas_ everyday (64). Possessed of the
blessings of the Pārijāta, they will not think of adhering to these
observances; and if they are neglected, we shall also dwindle away in
our strength being deprived of their benefit²⁸⁹ (65). We rear the corn
on which men on earth live, by showering on them sufficient rain from
here; and they also in their turn gratify ourselves by the celebration
of sacrifices and acts of pious liberality (66). If when possessed of
the blessings of Pārijāta, hunger, thirst, disease decrepitude, death,
dissatisfaction, stinking smells and other dreadful visitations of
Providence do not afflict men any longer, why should they strive for the
attainment of Heaven (67–68)? For these reasons, it is not at all
advisable to take down the Pārijāta tree there. Thus, O twice-born sage,
should Vishnu that performer of sinless deeds, be addressed by thee
(69). If thou wishest to please me, O sage, thou shalt also do, after
mature judgment, all that: would go to gratify my brother Kesava (70).
Let Kesava if he desires it, take down to Dwarka, garlands, gems,
jewels, the _Agura_ sandal, and beautiful garments and such other things
which the mortals are entitled to, for the enjoyment of his wife. But it
behoves him not to plunder heaven now (71–72). I shall give whatever
gems he may desire to have, I shall give beautiful ornaments of all
sorts, but I will never give him, O sage, the Pārijāta tree that most
beloved possession of the inhabitants of heaven (73)".

²⁸⁸ Literally his prowess and energy.

²⁸⁹ It is believed that the burnt offerings in the celebration of
 sacrifices &c, constitute the chief sustemance of the immortals.