TITLE: INDRA SENDS DOWN PUNISHMENT

Vaishampayana said:—While in this wise the festivity, in his honor, was
suppressed, Sakra, the king of the celestials said to the clouds called
Samvartaka (1):—"O ye clouds, and elephants, if you cherish any respect
for your king and if you consider it as your duty to do what pleases me
(listen then to my words) (2). All these inhabitants of Vrindāvana are
attached to Dāmodara. Nanda and other Gopas have grown inimical towards
my festival (3). Therefore within seven nights, distress, with rain and
winds, the precious kine which constitute their life-long subsistence
and for which they pass by the name of Gopas²³² (4). I myself, stationed
on (my elephant) Airavata, shall discharge dreadful rain, winds and
showers effulgent like thunder and lightning (5). With dreadful showers
and winds you will kill all the kine and the inhabitants of Vraja and
leave them after they all kiss the ground" (6).

On account of his festival being put down by Krishna the powerful
Pākashāsana thus issued his mandate to the clouds (7). Thereupon, the
dreadful dark-blue clouds, resembling a mountain in size and muttering
awfully, covered the sky on all sides (8). Producing lightnings
continually the clouds, adorned with the bow of Indra, enshrouded the
welkin with darkness (9). Touching one another, all the clouds, some
resembling the elephants, some the Makaras²³³ and some the serpents,
began to move about in the sky (10). Coming in contact with one another
the clouds, resembling a million of elephants, covered the sky and
created a very unfair day (11). Showers of equal size, some resembling
the hands of men, some the trunks of elephants and some bamboos the
clouds began to pour down their watery contents (12). People took that
dreadful weather as a deep, unpassable and limitless ocean stationed in
the sky (13). Hearing the dreadful mutterings of the mountain like
clouds, the birds could not come out of their nests and the animals
began to fly away on all sides (14). By the excessive showers discharged
by the dreadful clouds resembling the hour of the universal dissolution
the bodies of men grew discoloured (15). The planets and stars
disappearing from view, the sky, shorn of the rays of the sun and the
moon was divested of its lustre (16). With the continual showers of rain
let off by the clouds the ground there assumed the form of a tank (17).
The peacocks began to cry aloud and the other birds began to emit their
feeble notes. And the rivers, increasing their size, carried away the
trees grown on their banks (18). As if remonstrated with by the
mutterings of clouds and the clap of thunderbolts the grass and trees
began to tremble there (19). Beside themselves with fear the milk-men
began to speak amongst themselves: "We think the end of the world is at
hand and the earth will be converted into one sheet of water (20)." The
cows were greatly distressed by that dreadful downpour of rain. And they
stood motionless and began to cry aloud (21). Their body was soaked,
thighs and feet were motionless, hoops and mouth inert, the hairs stood
erect and their belly and udders grew lean (22). Some died out of
exhaustion, some took to their heels in fear and some with their calves
sank under frost (23). Some cows, of emaciated belly on account of
hunger and wearied thighs, lay to sleep embracing their calves (24). The
cows and calves, thus assailed by rain, fell down trembling and with
poor and distressing countenance looked towards Krishna and cried "Save
us! Save us! (25)"

Beholding this dreadful oppression over the cows on account of that
inclemeny and the impending death of the Gopas the sweet-speeched
Krishna was greatly worked up with anger. And meditating for a while he
began to speak to himself (26–27):—"I knew before that this will come to
pass. However to protect them against this downpour of rain I will
uproot this best of mountains Govardhana containing forests and woods
and convert it into an asylum for the kine (28). There is not a shadow
of doubt that this mountain, a veritable planet on earth, when upheld by
me, will be able to protect the kine and milk-men" (29).

Thus meditating and displaying the strength of his arms Krishna, having
truth for his prowess and resembling the best of mountains, uprooted
that hill with his hands (30). Then that foremost of mountains,
containing clouds, upheld by Krishna with his left hand, shone there
like a house on account of its caves (41). When that mountain was
uprooted the rocks, at its table-land, were shaken and the trees fell
down (32). And although that mountain was immoveable still, on account
of Krishna’s power, with its whirling summits, falling trees and
trembling tops it went up to the sky (33). All the clouds, united, were
pouring down their watery contents in its side. With their
quick-coursing streams the rocks were loosened and the mountain too was
continually agitated (34). The milk-men however could not perceive the
raining clouds, the rock-pouring mountain and the roaring wind (35). The
clouds, attached to the mountain, coming in contact with the springs
that best of mountains shone there as if bedecked with peacock feathers
(36). Vidyadharas, Uragas, Gandharvas and Apsarās began to exclaim from
all sides—"Gifted with wings the mount Govardhana is flying up" (37).
White, crimson and dark mineral substances began to trickle down from
the earthen layer of that uprooted mountain containing a thousand of
layers (38). Some of the summits of that best of mountain were
slackened, some were shattered and the highly elevated ones entered into
clouds (39). With the shaking of the mountains, the trees also shook,
and their flowers fell down on all sides of the ground (40). The
big-hooded serpents, having half of their body adorned, issued out of
their holes and the birds began to fly up in the sky (41). Out of fear
consequent upon the raising up of the mountain and of heavy downpour
these sky rangers began continually to fly up and come down (42). The
lions in anger began to roar like clouds surcharged with water and the
tigers like that of the churning rods (43). Having its form
metamorphosed that mountain, consisting of even, uneven and impassable
places, appeared like another mountain (44). On account of the excessive
downpour of showers it appeared like Tripura²³⁴ stupified by Rudra in in
the sky (45). Upheld by the rod-like hand of Krishna that huge mountain,
covered with dark-blue clouds, appeared there like an umbrella (46). The
muttering of the clouds making him dream, Govardhana slept there placing
his cave-like face on the pillow of Krishna’s arm (47). Having its
summit covered with trees divested of the notes of the birds and soaked
with the showers and shorn of the cries of peacocks, that mountain shone
there like the sky (48). The summit and forest of that high mountain
were as if possessed by fever on account of its table-lands shaking and
trembling (49). Hastened by the king of gods and driven by the wind the
clouds began to pour down before it continually their contents (50).
Upheld by Krishna’s hand that mountain, covered with clouds, appeared
like a country marked with the signs of wheels when oppressed by a king
(51). As a populous village places before it a city so the clouds stood
encircling that mountain (52).

For protecting the Gopas like unto Brahmā the Lord Krishna raised up
that mountain and kept it on the tip of his finger. He then smilingly
said (53).

"By some heavenly means which is even beyond the comprehension of the
gods I have constructed this mountainous house, an asylum for the cows
where no wind blows (54). Let the flocks of cows speedily enter into it
and peacefully and happily live there where no violent wind blows. Do
ye, of your own accord, make divisions of the room proportionate to your
superiority of position and the number of flocks and put a stop to the
downpour of showers. The big house, that I have constructed by uprooting
this hill extending over five _Kos_ and one _Kos_ in breadth, can even
accommodate the three worlds, what to speak of Vraja (55-57)".

There arose a great tumult of the Gopas accompanied by the mutterings of
clouds outside and the noise of the cows. And arranged in rows by the
milk-men the kine entered into the huge cave of that best of mountains
(58–59). And standing at the foot of that mountain like a rising pillar
of stone Krishna held that hill with one hand like a beloved guest (60).

Thereupon taking with them their carts and vessels the inhabitants of
Vraja, afraid of rain, entered into that rocky house (61). Beholding
this superhuman feat of Krishna and finding his words falsified the
powerful Satakratu asked the clouds to desist (62). And surrounded by
clouds which deprived the earth of all festivities for seven nights he
returned again to the celestial region (63). Thus after seven nights
when the king of gods desisted and the sky was freed of clouds and
become clear the sun rose in its full effulgence (64). The cows and the
milk-men returned to their respective quarters by the same road by which
they had entered (the cave) (63). For the well-being of all the worlds
the Lord Krishna, the giver of boons and identical with all the
elements, established, with a delighted heart, that best of mountains²³⁵
(66).

²³² Literally the word means one who protects kine from _go_, kine and
 the root _pa_, to protect.

²³³ A root of acquatic animal resembling a crocodile.

²³⁴ The Danava chief who was defeated by Rudra or Siva in the war
 between the gods and demons.

²³⁵ This miracle of Krishna’s holding up of the mountain Govardhana on
 one of his fingers has been described in almost all the Puranas
 and even in the Sabha Parva of the Mahabharata. This incident, no
 doubt, on the face of it, appears highly incredible for, it is not
 possible for a man, nay for a boy of ten years of age to raise up
 a huge mountain like Govardhana. It is undoubtedly an allegory
 signifying the wonderful power of Krishna displayed by him for
 protecting the Gopas. The following explanation may be safely
 vouchsafed of the allegory. When he suppressed the worship of
 Indra and all his followers attacked the Gopas, Krishna placed
 them all, with their cattle and goods, on that hill and himself
 fought with the followers of Indra. It is mentioned in the latter
 portion of this Chapter that the Gopas entered into the hollow of
 the mountain, their ’hilly house’ and so forth. This probably may
 suggest an explanation that they took shelter in one of the huge
 caves of the mountain and Krishna guarded them against the attack
 of the worshippers of Indra. Whatever may be the explanation it is
 undoubtedly true that he displayed a superhuman feat on this
 occasion.