TITLE: KROUSHTHU’S FAMILY

Vaishampayana said:—The highly illustrious Vrijinivān was Kroushthu’s
son. His son was Swāji the foremost of those celebrating Yajnas (1).
Swāhu’s son was the king Ushadgu the foremost of speakers. Desiring to
have a most excellent son he propitiated the celestials with various
grand sacrifices accompanied with profuse presents. By performing
various religious ceremonies he obtained a son by name Chitraratha
(2–3). His son was the royal saint Sashavindu who was a hero, performed
Yajnas duly and gave away profuse presents (4) The highly illustrious
king Prithushravā was Sashavindu’s son. Sages, well-read in Purānas,
designate Prithushravā’s son as Antara. His son was Suyajna whose son
was Ushata. He was the foremost of all men desirous of celebrating
sacrifices according to the prescribed modes of their respective orders
(5–6). Shineyu, the repressor of his enemies, was Ushata’s son. The
royal saint Marutta was Shineyu’s son (7). Marutta obtained
Kamvalavarhisha as his eldest son. He, in anger, performed various
religious ceremonies securing excellent fruits in the next world (8).
Kamvalavarhisha obtained Sutaprasuti as his son who again begat a son by
name Rukshmakāvācha (9). Having slain in battle a very clever warrior
wearing a hundred coats of mail with sharpened arrows Sutaprasuti
attained to most excellent prosperity (10). From Rukshmakavacha was born
Parājit the slayer of hostile heroes. Parājit begat five highly powerful
sons, namely Rukshmeshu, Prithurukshma, Jyāmogha, Pālita and Hari. Their
father gave away Pālita and Hari to the king of Videha (11-12).
Rukshameshu became the king assisted by Prithurukshma. Having been
exiled by them both from the kingdom, Jyāmogha lived in a hermitage
(13). Living in the forest and acquiring equanimity of mind he was
instructed by the Brāhmanas.

Thereupon ascending his car that car-warrior conquered foreign countries
and then lived alone in the city of Mirthikavati situate on the bank of
Nerbuda. Then conquering the mount Rikshavatam he lived in the city of
Shuktimati (14–15). Jyāmogha’s wife Shaivyā was very strong and chaste.
The king, although he had no issue, did not espouse any other wife (16).
He became victorious in a certain battle and obtained a daughter there.
Then the king, in a great hurry, said to his wife "She will be your
daughter-in law." Hearing this the queen said "Whose daughter-in-law
will she be?" Thereat Jyamogha, the foremost of kings, said "This
Upadānavi will be the wife of a son that will be born to you." On
account of the hard austerities of that girl that fortunate Shaivyā, in
her advanced years, gave birth to a son by name Vidarbha (17-19).
Vidarbha begat on that girl two heroic and learned sons well-acquainted
with the various modes of warfare by name Kratha and Kaishika (20). His
third son Lomapāda was highly pious. His son was Vabhru whose son was
Ahvriti. His son Kaishika was learned and highly pious. His son was
Chedi after whose name pass the kings of the Chaidya race (21-22).
Vidarbha’s son was Bhima whose son was Kunti. He begat two sons, namely,
Dhrishta and the powerful Anadhristha. Dhrishtha had three highly pious
and heroic sons, namely, Avanta, Dhshārha and the powerful Vishahara.
Dashārha’s son was Vyomā from whom was born Jeemuta (23–24). His son was
Vrehati whose son again was Bhimaratha. And his son was Navaratha (25).
His son was Dasharatha whose son was Shakuni. From the latter was born
Karambha. The king Devarāta was Karambha’s son. His son was Devakshatra.
The highly illustrious, god-like and sweet-speeched king Madhu, the
glory of his race, was Devakshatra’s son. Madhu begat on his wife
Vaidarbhi a son by name Maruvasa (26–28). Purudvāna, the foremost of
men, was Maruvasa’s son. O foremost of Kurus, he begat on his
Bhadravati, born in the race of Vaidarbhas, a son by name Madhu (29).
Madhu married a lady of the Ikshwāku family from whom was born Satvāna.
He was endued with the quality of goodness and enhanced the glory of the
Sātwatas (30). The man, who knows this account of the family of the
high-souled Jyāmogha, gets offspring and highest felicity (31).