TITLE: AN ACCOUNT OF NARAYANASHRAMA

Vaishampayana said:—Having been thus worshipped by the Rishis the Lord
entered into the celestial habitation of Brahmā, the hermitage of
Nārāyana as described in the Puranas (1). Having honored delightedly all
those Rishis and bowed unto the Prime Deity the Lotus-sprung Brahmā he
entered into the region mentioned before (2). Having entered the
Narayana hermitage which was so named after Him the Lord left off all
his weapons (3). He saw there his own abode resembling an ocean, filled
with the gods and the immortal Rishis (4). That abode was covered with
Samvartaka and other clouds, enshrouded with the darkness of the starry
region and was beyond the reach of the gods and demons (5). There the
winds do not blow and the sun and the moon do not shine. It was
enveloped with the effulgence of the body of the Lotus-navelled Deity
(6). Entering there, carrying matted locks and being thousand-headed the
Lord began to make arrangements for lying down (7). The death-like
sleep, having dark eyes and being informed of the last days of men,
appeared before that high-sould deity (8). On account of his acquiring a
mastery over his senses, Hari, the foremost of those observant of vows,
laid himself on a celestial bed cool like the water of the Ocean (9).¹⁷¹
The Rishis and the Gods began to worship the great Omnipotent Vishnu,
thus gone to sleep for the creation of the universe (10).¹⁷² When he was
asleep there sprang from his navel a lotus, highly effulgent like the
sun (intended for the) seat of the Patriarch Brahmā, who is both the
beginning and the end (11). That lotus had a thousand petals, a
beautiful hue, was tender and well-adorned. Raising up his hand which is
the thread of the pristine desire the great Muni Brahmā whirls the wheel
of the changes of all the worlds brought about by time (12).¹⁷³ From his
mouth the Patriarchs come out shaken by the wind of his breath.
Sometimes they fall down and sometimes they go up (13). Human beings,
thus created by him, are again divided by Brahmā into four orders. And
then by performing works laid down in the Vedas they reach their
respective goals (14). Even Brahmā himself and the immortal Rishis
cannot understand Vishnu, thus engaged in the Yoga of sleep and covered
with _Tamas_¹⁷⁴ (15). Those Brāhmana saints, headed by the Grand-father,
cannot find out when Nārāyana is asleep and when he does sit up on his
bed (16). Who is awake in this body? Who is asleep? Who, being capable,
does not perform a work? Who enjoys the various objects of pleasure? Who
is effulgent? And who is subtler than the subtle itself (17)?

By the various arguments laid down in Srutis the Rishis seek to find out
His existence. By birth or action none can find Him out (18). The
ancient Rishis have sung his glories in the Purānas and his history can
be known by the songs composed by him (19). His ancient history is also
heard amongst the gods. After the great Purānas there exists no other
record of his doings (20). All the Srutis, relating to the Vedas and the
customs and practices of mankind, are filled with an account of the
prowess of that god of gods (21). The Lord, the origin of all creatures,
appears at the time of the creation of all the worlds. And Madhusudana
remains awake for the destruction of the Dānavas (22). When this
immortal Purusha goes to sleep even the gods cannot look at him. He goes
to sleep at the end of the summer and awakes after the termination of
the rains (13). He is identical with the Vedas, the sacrifices and
various other supplementary rites. This foremost of Purushas is the
course of the sacrifices that has been described (24). When he falls
asleep all the sacrifices, sanctified by _Mantras_, are brought to a
close. And Madhusudana rises up when the autumnal sacrifices are
undertaken (25). When Vishnu goes to sleep, Purandara, the lord of
waters, performs all his duties and pours water (26). The illusion of
darkness, sleep, that exists in the world and that is like a night of
death to the kings, brings ruination upon them who kill one another by
fighting (27). By its body of darkness it destroys the nights and days.
And this dreadful illusion pilfers half of the life of all creatures in
the world (28). Being possessed by this sleep and yawning repeatedly
some people cannot bear its power as if they are almost drowned in a
vast ocean (29). This sleep, engendered by the food or toil of the
mortals in this world, does not conduce to the well-being of all (30).
It grows enfeebled after the termination of the dream of creatures in
this world; and this, at the time of their death, destroys all their
vital airs (31). Amongst the gods, none, but Nārāyana, can withstand the
power of this sleep. This Māyā or illusion is the female companion,
begotten by his own body, of Vishnu who destroys all (32). That one, of
lotus eyes, was seen on the face of Nārāyanā. This one, who stupifies
all the creatures, eats up all the worlds in no time (33). For the
behoof of mankind she is kept by Vishnu. She is adored of all as a
chaste lady serves her husband (34). Being possessed by this sleep and
having stupified the eternal world the Lord Vishnu slept in the Nārāyana
hermitage (35). When that high-souled deity was thus asleep thousands of
years passed away with the most excellent of cycles _Satya_ and _Tretā_
(36). That highly effulgent deity awoke at the close of the _Dwāpara
Yuga_, when the great saints, on witnessing the distress of mankind,
began to chant his glories (37).

The Rishis said:—O lord, do thou cast off this sleep begotten of thy own
self as a garland, already enjoyed, is left off. All the gods, along
with Brahmā, are waiting to see thee (38). O Hrishikesha, all these
self-controlled Rishis, well-versed in the knowledge of Brahman, and in
singing His glories, are welcoming thee (39). O Vishnu, hear the
auspicious words of these Rishis who are identical with the five
elements, namely, the earth, ether, fire, air and water (40). O gods,
the seven Rishis, along with all these saints, are chanting with
celestial and becoming hymns thy glories (41). Rise up, O thou of great
effulgence, O thou having a navel of a lotus of a hundred petals, some
important work of the gods requires thee (42).

Vaishampāyana said:—Having lessened the quantity of water and dispelled
darkness Hrishikesha rose up shining in his great beauty (43). He saw
there all the gods assembled along with the Grand-Father, greatly
aggrieved for the world and desirous of speaking something to him (44).
The Lord Nārāyana, with eyes relieved of exhaustion by sleep, addressed
to them words fraught with sound reasoning and far-sightedness (45).

Vishnu said:—"Where have you got your quarrel, O gods? From whom does
your fear proceed? Who feels a necessity and for what? And haw can I
help you (46)? Has any calamity befallen the world through the Dānavas?
Have men met with any misfortune on account of their weakness? I wish to
know all this without any delay (47). Having renounced my most excellent
bed I stand amongst the Brahmavādins for encompassing your well-being.
What can I do for you (48)?"

¹⁷¹ This is an allegorical account of Vishnu’s Samadhi or devout
 meditation.

¹⁷² Thus engaged in Samadhi.

¹⁷³ The meaning is that the creation of the universe is carried on by
 Brahmā. All the changes, that are manifest in the world, are his
 works. And this creation is the outcome of his desire. He first
 cherishes the desire and then engages in the work of creation.

¹⁷⁴ The quality of darkness. The meaning of the passage is that when
 Vishnu, possessed by the desire of creation, is engaged in
 meditating upon his own true form. When _Satwa_, or the quality of
 goodness, reigns supreme in him, he absolutely retires from the
 work of creation and when he is possessed by the desire of
 creation the quality of _Tamas_ or darkness predominates in him.
 The origin of this _desire_ in him is the root of creation, for
 the whole universe before us is the outcome of his will. According
 to the Hindu mythology the work of creation and dissolution is
 perpetually going on, And each of these work is dependant on the
 pure and absolute will of the Lord. When Vishnu, the Supreme Lord,
 happens to cherish a desire for creation he engages in meditating
 upon his true form. Thus meditation is allegorically represented
 as his sleep. From this meditation proceeds Brahmā who is to make
 arrangements for this great work. But he is dependant on the will
 of the Lord. Brahmā next creates the Patriarchs who are to be the
 originators of the various families.