TITLE: THE ASSEMBLY OF THE GODS

Vaishampayana said:—Saying ’so be it’ the Lord, having the hue of a
cloud and voice like its muttering in an unfair day, went away with the
gods like a mountain covered with clouds (1). At that time Hari, having
a dark-blue person, put on shining matted locks crested with jems and
pearls like a cloud with the moon (2). On his spacious breast, the hairs
whereof stood erect, there was the mystic mark of Srivatsa (3). Wearing
two pieces of yellow raiment that eternal Hari, the preceptor of the
world, looked like a mountain covered with evening clouds (4). When he
began to proceed on the back of Garuda the Lotus-born Deity (Brahmā) and
the gods, having their eyes fixed on him, began to follow him (5).
Having reached the jewelled mountain in no time they saw the assembly
hall built after their own hearts (6). It was built on the summit of the
mount Sumeru, and was effulgent like the sun. Its pillars were made of
gold and its gateways were crested with diamonds. It contained diverse
paintings on account of its being constructed by the mind and hundreds
of cars. Its windows were covered with the jewelled nets. It could go
any where at will and was embellished with jems. It was filled with many
sorts of jewels and flowers made of various metals. That celestial
assembly hall, filled with celestial illusion, was constructed by
Viswakarmān¹⁷⁶ (7–9). All the gods, with delighted minds, sat duly on
the seats properly assigned to each of them, in that auspicious assembly
hall (10). They sat on cars, seats, Bhadrāsanas,¹⁷⁷ Pithas,¹⁷⁸ and seats
of Kutha¹⁷⁹ (11). Thereupon at the command of Brahmā, the wind
Prabhanjana began to patrol on all sides of the assembly hall so that
there might not arise any sound (12). When everything was silent and
calm in that assembly of the gods the Earth plaintively began to address
them in piteous accounts (13).

The Earth said:—O god, do thou uphold me. By thee the whole universe has
been sustained. Thou art protecting the creatures and three worlds (14).
Whatever thou dost sustain by thy energy and strength, I do afterwards
hold it by thy favour (15). Whatever thou dost hold I do hold it and
whatever thou dost not sustain I too do not keep it. There is no element
in the universe which thou canst not sustain (16). O lord Nārāyana, at
various cycles thou dost relieve me of my burthen for the behoof of the
world (17). Being possessed by thy energy I have gone to the region
underneath. O foremost of gods, I am at thy mercy. Do thou save me (18).
I have been assailed by the wicked Dānavas and Rākshasas. Thou art my
eternal saviour and I am always at thy mercy (19). I know it for hundred
times that as long as I shall not seek refuge with Nārāyana who relieves
me of all loads so long I shall be under the influence of a mighty fear
(20). Before agriculture, merchandise and other means of livelihood were
instituted by the lotus-sprung Brahmā, in the days of yore, I was
reduced in dimension. Binding me two great Asuras, made of earth, were
born before (21). While this high-souled Vishnu was sleeping in the
mighty deep they originated from the dirt of his ears and remained like
two logs of wood (22). Despatched by the Grand-Father, air, in the shape
of vital breath, entered into the body of those two Dānavas. Thereupon
covering the sky those two great Asuras began to grow up (23). Brahma
gradually touched them both who were gifted with vital breaths. One of
them appeared to be soft and the other hard (24). The water-born Lord
Brahmā then gave them names. The one, who was soft, was named Madhu and
the other, who was hard, was called Kaitava (25). When those two Daityas
were thus named they, elated with the pride of their strength and being
fearless, began to range in the world converted into one sheet of water,
seeking battle (26). Beholding them thus approach Brahmā, the
grand-father of all, disappeared in the water of the universal ocean
(27). The four-mouthed grand-father desired to live secretly in the
lotus sprung from the navel of the lotus-navelled Vishnu (28). When
Nārāyana’s grand-sons, Madhu and Kaitava thus lived in the water, they,
living there for many long years, were not the least agitated (29).
Thereupon after many years, those two demons, Madhu and Kaitava, came
where Brahmā was stationed (30). Beholding those two dreadful,
huge-bodied and irrepressible Dānavas, Brahmā, with the stalk of the
lotus, disturbed Nārāyana. Thereat the highly-effulgent lotus-navelled
Deity rose up from his bed (31). At that time the three worlds were
covered with water and so in that one sheet of water there took place a
terrible encounter between Nārāyana and Madhu and Kaitava (32). That
dreadful battle continued for thousand years and those two Dānavas did
not experience least exhaustion in the encounter (33). After a long time
those two Dānavas, dreadful in battle, with a delighted heart, said to
the Lord Nārāyana. "We have been greatly pleased with fighting with
thee. Thou art our most desirable death. Do thou bring about our
destruction at a place on earth which is not filled with water (34-35).
O foremost of gods, slain by thee we shall become thy sons who
vanquishes us in battle" (35).

Catching these two demons with his arms in battle Nārāyana assailed
them. Thereat Madhu and Kaitava met with death (37). Thus killed those
two Dāityas were saturated with water. Their two bodies were then fused
into one. And then churned by the waves of the water they began to
discharge fat. The water was covered with fat.

O sinless one, thereupon they disappeared and the Lord Nārāyana again
engaged in the work of creation (38-39). On account of my being covered
with the fat of the demons Madhu and Kaitava I have passed by the name
of _Medini_. I have become the eternal universe by the power of the
lotus-navelled deity (40).

Again assuming the form of a boar in the presence of the Muni Mārkandeya
the Lord raised me up from the water with one tusk (41). Again at
another time before your fiery presence the powerful Vishnu released me
from the Daitya chief Bali (42). Now being oppressed and having none to
protect me I have sought refuge with the Lord of the universe Gadādhara
who is ever fond of his votaries (43). Fire is the cause of gold, the
sun is the cause of stars and so Nārāyana is my support (44). I am alone
holding this universe consisting of mobile and immobile creations. And
Gādadhara is supporting all these held by me (45). Desirous of relieving
me of my burden Jamadagni’s son Rāma, out of anger, divested me, for
twenty-one times, of the Kshatriyas (46). Raising up a pillar of
victory, Bhrigu’s son Rāma propitiated me with royal blood at the
obsequial rites of his father and then communicated it to Kashyapa (47).
Filled with a bad stench coming out of fat, flesh and bones and
saturated with the blood of the Kshatriyas I appeared before Kashyapa
like a youthful damsel in her course (48). The Brāhmana saint Kashyapa
then said to me:—"O earth, why art thou so depressed? Why dost thou,
being the wife of a hero, observe the vow of humiliation" (49). Thereat
I said to Kashyapa, the Patriarch of the world:—"O Brāhman, the great
Bhārgava has killed all my husbands (50). I have been divested of all
the powerful Kshatriyas who live on arms, and have lost my husband. I do
not wish to carry on me empty cities (51). Therefore, O Reverend Sir,
confer upon me such a king as will be able to protect me abounding in
villages and cities and engarlanded by oceans" (52).

Hearing my words the Omnipotent Lord said "Let it be so." Thereupon he
gave me away to Manu, the king of men (53). Thereupon obtaining the
god-like kings of the Ikshāku race, originating from Manu, I, under the
influence of powerful time, passed from the hands of one king to those
of another (54). When the Lord bestowed me upon the intelligent Manu,
the king of men, many kings, born in the families of great saints, ruled
over me (55). Having conquered me many heroic Kshatriyas have gone to
the celestial region. Under the influence of time they have disappeared
in me (56). The powerful Kshatriyas, ever victorious in battle, fought
for me in this world with one another and they have been still fighting
even now (57). This is the end of destiny despatched by thee. If thou
hast commisseration for me, if thou dost wish to relieve me of my burden
do thou organise a war for the destruction of the kings for the behoof
of the world. May the beautiful holder of discus alone grant me
protection (58–59). May Nārāyana command me to whom I have come for help
oppressed with a load, if he thinks proper to relieve me of it (60).

¹⁷⁶ He was the architect of the gods.

¹⁷⁷ Most excellent seat.

¹⁷⁸ The seat of the religious student made properly of Kusa grass.

¹⁷⁹ A kind of tree.