TITLE: THE BATTLE BETWEEN KRISHNA AND JARASHANDHA

Vaishampayana said:—Thereupon there commenced a great battle between the
Vrishnis and the commanders and vassal kings of the lord of Magadha (1).
O foremost of the descendants of Bharata, Vāsudeva fought with Rukshmi,
Ahuka with Bishmaka, Vasudeva with Kratha, Vabhru with Kaishika, the
king of Chedi with Gava, and Shambhu with Dantavakra. Thus did the great
heroes and soldiers, belonging to the army of Vrishnis, fight for
twenty-seven days with the highly powerful sovereigns and soldiers of
the king of Magadha’s party (3-4). Those who rode elephants fought with
such, the cavalry with the cavalry, the infantry with the infantry and
the car-warriors with the car-warriors (5). A dreadful hair-stirring
encounter took place between Rāma and Jarāsandha like unto that between
Vitra and the king of gods (6). Caring for Rukshmini’s feeling Krishna
did not slay Rukshmi, but by virtue of his own learning he sent back his
shafts burning like the rays of the sun and dreadful like venomous
serpents. A dreadful onslaught of soldiers took place in this battle
(7-8). The battle-field was covered with mud of flesh and blood of both
the armies. In that encounter of both the contending armies an endless
number of headless figures arose from all sides. The car-warrior Rāma
enveloped Jarāsandha with arrows resembling poisonous serpents. The
heroic king of Magadha too covered him with arrows. Thereupon
approaching each other in quick-coursing cars they struck each other
with diverse weapons and sent up leonine shouts. After their horses and
charioteers been slain, their cars had been shattered and their weapons
fallen short they took up their clubs and ran towards each other. The
earth shook under the weight of their feet (9–13). Taking up their clubs
in anger those two highly powerful heroes, expert in fighting with clubs
and having arms as huge as mountain summits, ran towards each other. And
in order to witness their fight other heroes desisted from the encounter
(14). Thereupon those two highly powerful heroes, celebrated in the
worlds as the masters of the art of war, began to fight with each other
like two infuriated elephants (15). O king, thereupon came there from
all quarters thousands and thousands of gods Gandharvas, Siddhas, Saints
and Yakshas. Shining greatly in their effulgence the battle-field looked
like welkin covered with luminous bodies (16–17). Then turning toward
left the highly powerful Jarāsandha ran towards Rāma and Baladava too
turned towards south (18). By resounding ten quarters as an elephant
strikes his antagonist with his tusks so those two heroes, skilled in
club fighting, struck each other (19). In that encounter the sound of
the fall of the Baladeva’s club was heard like that of thunder-bolt, and
that of Magadha king’s club was like the riving of a mountain (20). As
the wind cannot agitate the mount Vindhya so the club, slipped off the
hands of Jarāsandha, could not shake the foremost of the holders of club
(21). By virtue of learning and patience Jarāsandha, the king of
Magadha, bore and withstood the velocity of Rāma’s club (22).

Thus moving about in diverse circles in the battle-field for a long time
both of them grew tired. And then taking rest for some time they began
to strike each other again (23–24). Those two foremost of warriors
fought with each other for some time on equal terms. And none of them
left the battle-field (25). Thereupon witnessing Jarāsandha’s efficiency
in club-fighting the powerful Rama left off his club in anger and took
up his mace (26). When in that great battle Baladeva, in anger, took up
the terrible-looking mace of sure aim there was heard in the sky a sweet
voice of the witness of the world which said to Baladeva the holder of
plough-share (27–28). "O Rāma, O thou the conferrer of honors, this king
of Magadha is not to be slain by thee. Be not sorry therefore and
desist. Jarasandha shall, in no time, meet with his death from the means
that I have laid out for his destruction (29)."

Hearing this voice of Providence Jarāsandha lost heart and Baladeva did
not strike him therefore (30). O Emperor, while they thus desisted from
fighting there took place a highly terrible encounter extending over a
long time between the Yadavas and other kings in which they struck one.
another fiercely. When the Emperor Jarāsandha was thus defeated and took
to his heels and when the sun set the highly powerful Yadavas, protected
by Krishna, who had gained their aim, did not pursue him in night. And
gathering their respective soldiers according to the will of Mādhava
they entered into their own city. And all the weapons that came down
from the welkin also disappeared (31-34). And filled with
absent-mindedness, king Jarāsandha too returned to his own city. And the
kings, who followed him, returned to their respective kingdoms (35). On
the other hand, O foremost of kings, having defeated Jarāsandha the
Yādavas could not consider themselves as completely above defeat, for he
was a highly powerful king (36). The great car warriors Yādavas fought
with him for eighteen times and still they could not slay him in the
battle-field (37). O foremost of Bharatas, king Jarāsandha had twenty
Akshouhinis of soldiers who all came with him (38). The Vrishnis were
very few in number and so they were overpowered by the king Vārhadratha
who was followed by other kings (39). Having thus defeated Jarāsandha
the king of Magadha, the great car-warriors Vrishnis began to live
happily (40).