TITLE: ARJUNA DESCRIBES ANOTHER WONDERFUL WORK

Janamejaya said:—O you of large arms, O foremost of the twice-born, I
wish again to listen to an account of the glorious deeds of Krishna, the
lord of the world. I have not been satiated with listening to the
extensive works of the high-souled, intelligent and ancient Purusha
Krishna (1-2).

Vaishampāyana said:—O king, it is impossible to finish, even in hundred
years, the account of the glorious deeds of Govinda (3). Hear now of the
highly wonderful deeds of Keshava which Vibhatsu (Arjuna), the holder of
Gāndiva bow, described excited by Bhisma lying on the bed of arrows (4).
O royal descendant of Kuru, hear what he told his eldest brother
Yudhisthira who had vanquished all his enemies, in the presence of the
kings (5).

Arjuna said:—Formerly to see my relations I had gone to the city of
Dwārakā and entertained by the Bhojas, Vrishnis and Andhakas I had lived
there for some time (6). At that time the virtuous-souled and
large-armed slayer of Madhu undertook the celebration of a sacrifice
extending over a day according to Shastric rites. When Krishna sat for
the celebration of that sacrifice, one Brāhmana, describing his own
affairs, sought for protection (7-8).

The Brāhmana said:—O lord, thou art now in charge of the protection (of
subjects); besides a saviour is entitled to the one fourth share of the
piety acquired by a good work (9).

Vasudeva said:—"O foremost of the twice-born, may you farewell. Do not
fear (any body). I will protect you from him, even if it be a difficult
task, who is the cause of your fear. Tell me who is the spring of your
fear (10)." The Brāhmana said:—"O thou of large arms, my sons are stolen
away as soon as they are born. O sinless Krishna, three of my sons were
stolen away as soon as they were born. Thou shouldst now protect the
fourth son. O Janārddana, my wife is under the labour pain. Thou
shouldst so arrange that my child may not be stolen away" (11-12).

Arjuna said:—Thereupon Govinda said to me "I am to day celebrating a
sacrifice. But a Brāhmana should be protected by us in whatever
circumstances we may be." Hearing those words of Krishna I said to
Govinda:—"Appoint me, I will remove the fear of the Brāhmana" (13–14).
Thus addressed Janarddana, smiling a little, said:—"Will you be able to
save him?" O kings, I was greatly ashamed hearing those words of
Krishna. Seeing me thus ashamed Janārddana again said "Go, if you are
capable of protecting him. Except the large-armed Rāma and the great
car-warrior Pradyumna, let all other members of the Vrishni and Andhaka
families follow you." Thereupon encircled by the Vrishni army, I set out
with the Brāhmana before me (13–18).