TITLE: AN ACCOUNT OF PITRIS

Markandeya said:—Hear from me everything from the very beginning, O son
of Ganga, of my doubts which I again referred to that reverend eternal
deity Sanatkumar the foremost of immortals after having been addressed
by that effulgent god of gods (1-2). What is the number of those
ancestral manes and in what region are they stationed? And where do live
the leading gods who derive nourishment from Soma (juice)? (3)

Sanatkumar said:—O foremost of those who perform sacrifices, it is laid
down in Scriptures, that there are seven ancestral manes who all live in
heaven. Of them four are with forms and three without them (4). O you
having asceticism for your wealth, hear, I will describe at length their
region, creation, prowess and greatness (5). Of them the most excellent
three assumed the form of Dharma (virtue). Hear, I shall describe their
names and regions (6). The regions, where the effulgent and formless
ancestral manes, the sons of Prajāpati live, are (designated as) eternal
(7). O foremost of the twice-born, the region of Virāja is known by the
name of Vairāja. The celestials adore them with ceremonies laid down in
Scriptures (8). These Brahmavādins, when they deviate from the paths of
Yoga come down to _Sanatana_ (eternal) regions and after the expiration
of a thousand yugas they take their birth (9). Then obtaining again the
recollection of the most excellent Sānkhya Yoga and securing the
consummate development of their powers they again attain to that Yoga
state which it is so hard to acquire (10). O my child, they are the
Pitris who enhance the ascetic powers of the Yogins and they, by their
Yoga, propitiated Soma in the days of yore (11). Therefore Srāddhas
should be performed particularly for the Yogins. This is the first
creation of the high-souled drinkers of Soma (12). Their mind-begotten
daughter Mena was the first wife of the mountain chief Himalaya. Her son
was called Maināka (13). His son was the effulgent great mountain
Krauncha. This best of mountains was white and abounded in various sorts
of jewels (14). The mountain-king begat on Mena three daughters, namely,
Aparna, Ekaparnā—and the third was Ekapatāla (15). Having carried on
hard austerities, which even the Gods and Dānavas cannot practise with
difficulty, those three daughters disturbed all the worlds consisting of
mobile and immobile creatures (16). Ekaparnā used to live upon one leaf
only and Ekapātala used to live upon one Patala flower only (17). And
when Aparnā divorced from food began to carry on hard austerities, her
mother, stricken with sorrow, consequent upon her motherly affection,
prevented her, saying "_U. Ma._" (18). Thus addressed by her mother,
that fair goddess, carrying on hard penances, became celebrated in the
three worlds by the name of _Uma_ (19). She also became celebrated by
the name of _Yogadharmin_.³³ O Bhargava, this world consisting of three
maidens shall (for ever) exist (20). All the three were endued with yoga
energy and bodies³⁴ perfected by hard austerities. They were all
conversant with the knowledge of Brahman and had controlled their carnal
desires (21). The beautiful Umā was the eldest and foremost of them.
Gifted with great yoga powers she approached the Great Deity Siva (22).
Ekaparnā was given away as a wife unto the high-souled, intelligent and
the great Yogin and preceptor, the black Devala (23). Know Ekapātala as
the wife of Jaigishavya. Those two noble maidens approached those two
preceptors of yoga (24). The celestials offer watery oblations for all
those regions of _Somayagins_³⁵ that are called Somapadā and where dwell
the sons and ancestral manes of the Patriarch Marichi (25). They all
pass by the name of Agnisvatta and are gifted with immeasurable energy.
They have a mind-born daughter by name Achhodā who travels underneath³⁶
(26). From that (river) has sprung a lake by the name of Achhoda. She
had never seen her ancestral manes before (27). That one of beautiful
smiles (thou) saw her bodiless ancestral manes. She was begotten of
their mind and did not know her. For this misfortune that beautiful
damsel was greatly ashamed. Beholding the ancestral mane Vasu, the
illustrious son of Ayu by the name of Amāvasu, who was passing through
the etherial region in a car along with the Apsarā Adrikā, she thought
of him³⁷ (first) (28–30). On account of her this frailty, that she
thought of another and not her own father, that one capable of assuming
forms of her will lost her Yoga power and fell down (31). When she fell
down from the celestial region she behold three cars of the size of
_Esarenu_ and espied in them her ancestral manes (32). They looked
exceedingly subtle, indistinct and like fire offered into clarified
butter. While she was in distress and falling down with her head
downwards she exclaimed "Save me" (33). The ancestral manes stationed on
the cars said to their girl who was in the etherial region "do not
fear." Then with purely words she began to propitiate the ancestral
manes (34). The ancestral manes then said to that girl who was divested
of all her merits on account of this transgression:—"O thou of pure
smiles, for thy own folly, thou hast been divested of all thy merits
(35). The celestials attain, in heaven, to the fruits of their actions
which they perform with their bodies in this world (36). (Sometimes)³⁸
the celestials, by their (mere) determination attain to the fruits of
their actions but mankind reap them only when they repair to the next
world. Therefore, O daughter, by practising hard austerities in this
world thou shalt reap the fruits thereof in the next (37)."

Thus accosted by her own Pitris the maiden began propitiating them. Then
realising the truth in their own minds, they all, out of compassion,
became pleased with her (38). Knowing that all this is inevitable they
asked that maiden to act (in that way) and said to her:—"Thou shalt be
born as the daughter of the high-souled king Vasu who is born on earth
among men. Being born as his daughter thou shalt again attain to thy own
regions which it is so hard to gain (39-40). Thou shalt give birth to
the illustrious son of Parāshara.³⁹ That great Brāhmana saint shall
divide the one Veda into four parts (41). Two sons, the illustrious and
pious Vichitravirya and Chitrangada, will be born unto the king
Shāntanu, who was (in another birth the king) Mahābhisha. Having given
birth to these sons thou shalt again attain to thy own regions. On
account of thy transgressions towards thy ancestral manes thou shalt
come by these inferior births (42-43). Thou shalt be begotten as his
daughter by this king on his wife Adrikā. In the eighteenth Dwāpara
cycle thou shalt be born as a fish" (44). Thus spoken to by her
ancestral manes that maiden was born in Dasha family as Satyavati. First
born as a fish she became the daughter of the king Vasu (45).

The picturesque region Vaibhrāja, where dwell the Pitris celebrated in
heaven as Varhishadas, is situate in Dyuloka (46). The highly effulgent
celestials, Yakshas, Gandharvas, Rakshasas, Nāgas, Sarpas (serpents),
Suparnas (birds) offer oblations for (the attainment of those) regions
(47). They are the offspring of the high-souled Patriarch Pulastya. They
were all great, highly meritorious, energetic and used to carry on
ascetic observances. Their mind-born daughter was known as Pivari. She
was (herself) a great ascetic, the wife of an ascetic, and the mother of
an ascetic (48–49).

O you foremost of the pious, at the commencement of Dwāpara Yuga, the
great ascetic and Yogin Suka, the foremost of Brāhmanas born in the race
of Parashara, will take birth in that Yuga. He will be begotten by Vyasa
on _Arani_ like fire divested of smoke (50–51). He will beget on that
daughter of the ancestral manes four sons, _viz_, the highly powerful
Yoga-teacher Krishna, Goura, Prabhu and Shambhu, and a daughter by name
Kritwā, who will be the mother of Brahmadatta and the queen of king
Anuha (52–53). Having begotten these vow-observing teachers of Yoga and
listened to various forms of religion from his own sire Vyasa, the
immeasurably intelligent, pious and ascetic Rishi Suka repaired to the
region from where no one returns—the eternal, undecaying region of
Brahman shorn of all troubles, where reside the shape-less Pitris in the
form of virtue, and where has originated this theme of Vrishnis and
Andhakas (54–55). The ancestral manes of the Patriarch Vasishtha, known
as Sukātas, live eternally in heaven and the region lighted by the
effulgence that grants the consummation of all desires. The Brāhmanas
always offer them oblations (57). Their mind born daughter is known as
Go in the region of celestials, who will be given (in marriage) to your
family and be the other beloved wife of Suka. The Sādhyas have a
well-known daughter, ever enhancing their fame, by name Ekashringā.
(58). She lives in the regions effulgent like the rays of the Sun. The
Kshatriyas, who wish to reap the fruits of their actions, propitiate the
sons of Angiras, who had formerly been rendered prosperous by Sāddhyas.
Their mind-born daughter is known as Yashodā (59–60). She was the wife
of Vishwamahata, daughter-in-law of Vriddhasharmā and the mother of the
high-souled royal saint Dilipa (61). O my son, formerly in the cycle of
gods, at the great horse-sacrifice of the king Dilipa the great saints
chanted various themes with joy (62). Hearing of the birth of Agni
(fire-god) from some descendant of Shandili, those men, who will behold
the truthful and high-souled performer of sacrifices Dilipa, will
conquer the celestial region (63). The ancestral manes of the Patriarch
Karddama, Sudhanwās by name, came into being from the noble Brāhmana
Pulaha (64). They, gifted with etherial movements, are living in the
regions where the dwellers move about of their own will. The Vaishyas
who wish to reap the fruits of their actions, offer oblations unto them
(65). Their mind-born daughter is celebrated by the name of Viraja. O
Brahman, she will be the mother of Yayati and the wife of Nahusha (66).
Thus I have described to you the three orders: hear from me of the
fourth order. The drinkers of Soma juice, who were begotten on Swadhā
the daughter of Kavi, were the offspring of Hiranyagarbha. The Sudras
encompass their gratification (67). The etherial region where they dwell
is called Mānasa. Their mind-born daughter is Narmadā the foremost of
streams (68). Traversing the southern way she is purifying the
creatures. She is the wife of Purukutsa and the mother of Trāsadasyu
(59). The ancestral manes are to be adored—and when this is neglected at
various cycles the Patriarch Manu introduces the performance of Srāddha
in their honour (70).

O foremost of the twice-born, of all the ancestral manes Yama was first
born and he protected all created beings by his own virtue. Therefore he
is designated in the Vedas as Srāddhadeva (71). When after reciting the
mystic formulae, oblation is offered in silver or silver-plated vessels
to the ancestral manes it encompasses their gratification (72). Having
first propitiated Yama the son of Vivaswān and then Soma, one should
offer oblation unto fire; and in the absence of fire unto water (73).
The ancestral manes are pleased with him who reverentially brings about
their gratification, and confer upon him nourishment, innumerable
offspring, wealth and all other desired-for objects. O ascetic, the
worship of the ancestral manes is preferred to that of the celestials
(74–75). It is ordained by scriptures that before the celestials the
ancestral manes should be gratified. The latter are easily pleased,
freed from anger and they confer the most excellent gratification on men
(76). O descendant of Bhrigu, the gratification of ancestral manes is
ever constant. Therefore do thou bow unto them. Thou art ever devoted
unto thy ancestral manes and specially unto me (77). I shall do what
conduces to thy well-being. Do thou witness it thyself. O sinless one, I
shall confer on thee celestial vision together with discriminative
knowledge (78). Listen attentively, O Markandeya, to the means thereof.
This is not the Yoga state of the celestials but the most excellent
state of the celestials (79). Such persons of consummate ascetic powers
behold me with their own eyes. Having thus spoken to me who was present
before him and conferred upon me celestial vision together with
discriminative knowledge, which even the celestials can with difficulty
acquire, the Lord of celestials (Sanatkumar) repaired to his wished-for
region like the second burning fire (80–81). O foremost of Kurus, hear
now, what I had heard, by the favour of that God—(things) above the
comprehension of men in this world (12).

³³ This is a name of the Goddess Uma. It literally means _who is
 naturally intent on carrying on Yoga practises_.

³⁴ The word in the text is _Tapamaya_ body. It is very difficult to
 render the expression into English. _Tapas_ means hard religious
 practises, such as, placing one’s self in the midst of burning
 fire, exposing one’s self day and night under the Sun and to cold.
 By such practises a yogin can acclimatise his body to the
 influences of climate and restrain his passions. Thus _Tapamaya_
 body means a body that is used to both heat and cold and all other
 climatic influences and that has mastered all the functions,

³⁵ Those who invoke the deities by offering them Soma juice—a
 delicious drink which is much liked by the gods according to Hindu
 ideas.

³⁶ This mind-born daughter refers to a river of the same name that
 has come down from that region to earth.

³⁷ The word in the text is _Vabre_ which literally means to choose as
 a husband. It may also mean to offer benedictory offerings to a
 deity or person. As it is impossible for a daughter to choose one
 of her ancestors as her husband the word evidently means here "to
 accept him and give him offerings as her father". The context
 proves that the maiden was anxious to behold her ancestral manes
 and so when she first saw Vasu, she took him for her father and
 offered him adoration. Later she perceived that he was not her
 father and her real Pitris were in the three cars. This was
 evidently a transgression, for which, as is seen later on, she was
 doomed to take birth as the daughter of Vasu.

³⁸ We have put in _Sometimes_ only for preserving consistency. In the
 previous sloka it is mentioned that even the celestials perform
 actions in this world and then attain to the fruits thereof in the
 next. Thus the gods also are under the influence of Karma. Whereas
 in this sloka it is said that by mere determination they attain to
 the fruits of their actions. Therefore the consistency is not
 preserved unless we put in the word ’_Sometimes_’. The author
 evidently had in view that the celestials, though under the
 influence of Karma, are sometimes freed therefrom. But that is not
 the case with men. They cannot avoid the consequences of their
 actions under any circumstances whatever.

³⁹ This refers to Veda Vyasa who compiled and arranged the four
 Vedas. The word Vyasa means "an arranger" Veda Vyasa is the
 surname of a Rishi, the son of Parashara, who compiled the four
 Vedas. The Vedas originally existed in the shape of hymns that
 were sung by the ancient Aryans and passed from one family to
 another as sacred heir-looms. For some centuries they existed in
 this form. It was this great Rishi who first committed them to
 writing and arranged them in the order in which they are now
 found. The four divisions are his own creation. On account of this
 great work he received the appellation ’Veda-Vyasa’.