TITLE: A DESCRIPTION OF VISHNU

Janamejaya said:—O Brahman, the sages describe in the Puranas, the
incarnations of Vishnu of unlimited energy We have heard from them that
the Lord incarnated himself as a boar. But we do not know fully his
history, his commands, his deeds, his accomplishments, his objects, his
conduct and prowess when he assumed before (this form) (1–3). We have
heard that Krishna Dwaipāyana⁷⁷ described this great boar-incarnation
before the twice-born ones when they assembled at a sacrifice (4), O
Brahman, I have heard how Madhusudana, incarnating himself as a boar,
saved with his tusks, the earth sunk in the ocean (5). O Brahman, now I
wish to hear at length the various deeds performed by the intelligent
Hari the slayer of enemies in his boar and various other incarnations⁷⁸
(6). You alone are capable of describing in order the various deeds of
the lord and his character, O Brahman (7). Why did the lord Vishnu, the
king of the celestials and the slayer of his enemies, take his birth as
Vāsudeva in Vasudeva’s family (8)? Why did He, leaving the land of gods,
abounding with immortals and pious men, come down on earth (9)? Why did
He, who is the king of gods and men and from whom the earth has
emanated, convert his celestial body into a human form (10). Why did He,
who is alone turning the healthy circle of mankind, and who is the
foremost of the holders of discus, set his heart upon assuming a human
form (11)? Why did the lord Vishnu, who protects all the great men of
the world, come down on earth as a milkman (12)? Why was Shrigarbha⁷⁹
identical with elements, who is the cause of the great elements
conceived by a woman ranging on earth (13)? He, desired by the
celestials, occupied the three worlds with his three foot-steps⁸⁰ and
thus laid down on earth the three roads of three Vargas⁸¹ (14). He, at
the time of the universal dissolution, drank up the earth and assumed
the form of water. He then converted the whole earth into one sheet of
water⁸² (15). He assumed in the days of yore the form of a boar and
saved the earth with his tusks (16). Having vanquished the Asuras on
behalf of Puruhuta⁸³ that foremost of gods conferred upon the celestials
the three worlds in the days of yore (17). Assuming the form of a
man-lion he killed the prime Daitya the highly energetic Hiranyakasipu⁸⁴
(18). Assuming the form of the submarine fire Samvartaka the lord, in
the days of yore, drank the watery oblations of the submarine region
(19). O Brahman, in various thousands of Yugas that Lord appeared with a
thousand heads, a thousand eyes and a thousand feet (20). When the whole
world was converted into one sheet of water, when the entire mobile and
immobile creations were destroyed there sprang from his navel a lotus on
which Brahmā (Grand-father) rested (21). In the encounter with Tāraka,
he, assuming a form consisting of all gods and holding all weapons, slew
the demons (22). Seated on Garuda and assuming a huge proportion he
killed the great demon Kālanemi and vanquished the great Asura Taraka
(23). Being engaged in eternal Yoga and resorting to his illusive energy
he lay on the northern side of the ocean of milk from which came out
ambrosia (24). On account of the consummation of her hard austerities
Aditi conceived that celestial ancient Purusha who was like the churning
rod of the celestials. Coming out of her womb as a dwarf he satisfied
the desire of Indra who had been confined by the demons (25). Placing
his feet in all the worlds he placed all the demons in the water. And
making the gods playful in heaven he conferred upon Indra the kingdom of
gods (26). He laid down the rules of Gārhapatya⁸⁵ and Anwāharya⁸⁶ works,
created the various articles of sacrifice such as Dakshina,⁸⁷ Diksha,⁸⁸
Chamasa⁸⁹ and Ulukhula,⁹⁰ created the fire where oblations could be
offered, made the sacrificial altar, Kusha,⁹¹ Sruva,⁹² Prokshaniya,⁹³
and Dhruva⁹⁴ created the three sorts of ambrosia beneficial to the bath
after the celebration of a sacrifice, made the twice born ones offer
Havya⁹⁵ and Kavya,⁹⁶ and the celestials to partake of the former and the
ancestral manes of the latter. After the lines laid down by Parameshthi
(Brahmā) He, in the days of yore, by various sacrificial _Mantras_,⁹⁷
made divisions of _Yupas_,⁹⁸ _Samidhas_,⁹⁹ _Srukas_,¹⁰⁰ _Soma_,¹⁰¹ the
sacred _Paridhri_,¹⁰² and of various other sacrificial articles, of the
room for placing sacrificial fire of the members, of _Yajamānas_¹⁰³ and
a classification of _Medha_¹⁰⁴ and other excellent sacrifices. Having
made various classifications of Yugas and displaying his prowess before
all men he created Kshana,¹⁰⁵ Lava,¹⁰⁶ Kāshtha,¹⁰⁷ Kalā,¹⁰⁸ the present,
past and future, divisions of time, Muhutta,¹⁰⁹ Tithi,¹¹⁰ months,
fortnights, years and seasons, the three divisions of the length of
life, the multiplication of the characteristics and the beauty of the
mobile and immobile creations, the three Varnas,¹¹¹ the three Lokas¹¹²
the three Vedas,¹¹³ the three fires,¹¹⁴ three Kālas,¹¹⁵ the threefold
actions,¹¹⁶ the three Upāyās¹¹⁷ (means), and the threefold Gunas¹¹⁸
(30–35). By his endless actions these three worlds had been created by
Him before. He is the creator of all the elements and Gunas and
identical with them all (36). By introducing birth and death amongst
mankind he makes them move about in the universe. He sports everywhere
in the shape of an animal. He is the lord of the universe (37). He is
the refuge of the pious and he (only) punishes the wicked. He is the
origin of the four Varnas and the protector of the four Hotras¹¹⁹ (38).
He is the master of the four-fold knowledge and the preserver of the
four Asramas.¹²⁰ He is identical with the various directions, with the
sky, with the air, fire and water (39). He is identical with the sun,
the moon and the rays. He is the lord of Yogins and He only brings about
the termination of the night. He is identical with the most excellent
lustre and _tapas_ of which we hear (40). The sages designate him as the
thread that connects all the souls; and the whole universe is His form.
The Vedas and all the works exist in Nārāyana (41). Nārāyana is the
greatest virtue and is the most most excellent condition. Truth exists
in Nārayanā and _Tapas_ exists in Him (42) Salvation exists in Nārāyana
and Nārāyana is the most excellent refuge. He is the Aditya and other
gods and he is the slayer of demons (43). At the time of the universal
dissolution he destroys all. He is the death unto the regent of the dead
who destroys all. He is the lord of (Manu and others) who have
instituted various orders of honour amongst mankind and he is more
sacred than (Ganga and others), who purify the mankind (44). He is the
object of learning unto those who are conversant with the Vedas; he is
the lord of the self-controlled (Rishis); he is more handsome than all
handsome objects, he is like fire unto those who are endued with
fire-like effulgence (45). He is the mind of men, the ascetic energy of
the ascetics, the morality of those who are strict moralists, the energy
of the energetic, the creator of all creations and the most excellent
origin of all the worlds (46). He is the idol ef those who seek the
idols and he is the motion of those who are endued with it. Ether is the
origin of air and air is the life of fire (47). The vital power of the
gods is fire and the life of fire is Madhusudana. Blood is engendered by
juice and by blood is created flesh (48). From flesh originates fat and
from fat originate the bones and from the bones originate the veins and
from veins originates the seminal fluid (49). And the seminal fluid is
the instrument of conception. By the process of action at the root of
which is the juice all this is created. Of them the water is the first
portion therefore it is called _Soumya_.¹²¹ The second ingredient is the
fire in the womb (50). Thus the seminal fluid, indential with fire, is
also made of blood. Thus the essence of all juice, the seminal fluid, is
created by an excess of cough and blood is created by an excess of
billious matter. The seat of cough is the heart and the seat of bile is
the navel. The heart, which is in the body, is known as the seat of the
mind. The fire exists as hunger behind the cavity of the navel. Mind is
known as Prajāpati (Brahmā), the cough as Soma and the bile as Agni
(fire-god). Thus the whole world is identical with fire (51–54). When a
conception, as is the formation of a cloud, takes place, the air,
accompanied by Paramātman, enters there¹²² (55). It then creates the
various limbs and nourishes them. The vital air, inside the body,
divides itself into five and gradually assumes proportions (56). The
five vital airs are Prāna, Apāna, Samāna, Udāna, and Vyāna. Prāna
nourishes the most important portion of the body namely, the heart (57).
Apāna nourishes the lower portion of the body up to the feet. Udāna
nourishes the breast and the upper portion of the body. The vital air,
by which works, requiring great strength, are performed, is called
Vyāna. And the vital air, Samāna which exists all over the body, remains
at the navel and distributes to their proper places whatever is drunk or
eaten. (After the distribution of the vital airs) the creatures acquire
the knowledge of the earth through their senses (58). Earth, air, ether,
water and light, are converted into senses. And then they occupy their
respective portions in the body and perform their respective functions.
The tongue, which has the water in it, draws the juice; the eye, which
has the light in it, sees the forms; the skin, which has the air in it,
hears sound. The hardest portion of the body is the transformation of
the earth. The vital air is the metamorphosis of the air; all the holes
originate from ether; the liquid portion is but water; the eye is the
form of light and the mind, which is the energy of the five elements, is
the lord of the senses. It is the mind, that, by its energy, makes the
senses perceive their respective objects (59–61). Having thus created
the ever-existing worlds why did the Great Purusha take his birth as a
man in this mortal world (62)? This is my doubt, this is what surprises
me. O Brahman, why did He, who is the energy of mankind, take his birth
as a man (63)? I have heard an account of my own family as well as of
those of my ancestors. I wish now to hear in due order of the families
of Vishnu and Vrishnis (64). That Vishnu is a great wonder is said by
the gods and demons. Do you, O great Muni, describe to me the wondrous
origin of Vishnu (65). Do you describe to me truly the wonderful and
delightful account of the highly energetic Vishnu of well-known deeds
and prowess who surprised the whole world by his actions (66).

⁷⁷ Dwaipayana is the surname of Krishna. The word literally means
 _island-born_, the place of his nativity being a small island in
 the Ganges.

⁷⁸ The ten principal forms which Vishnu assumed at various periods
 are called his _Avataras_; they are the fish, tortoise, the bear,
 the man-lion, the dwarf, the two Ramas, Krishna, Buddha and Kalki.

⁷⁹ Another name of Vishnu from Shree fortune and garbha womb.

⁸⁰ The allusion is. Bali, a demon king, performed many sacrifices for
 which he was about to attain to the dignity of Indra. The gods
 accordingly grew very anxious and prayed to Vishnu for succour.
 He, at their request, assumed the form of a dwarfish Brāhmana and
 went to Bali for alms. After Bali had promised him that he would
 give him whatever he would like to have Vishnu assumed a large
 proportion with three legs and asked Bali to give him room for
 placing his three feet. He placed one in heaven and the other on
 the earth. There was no room for the third which he placed on
 Bali’s head.

⁸¹ Three-fold objects of life, namely, Dharma (Virtue), Artha,
 worldly profit, Kama, Desire. These three roads were laid down by
 him for mankind. With virtue they can attain to heaven, worldly
 profit secures, for them, the earth and desire the region
 underneath it.

⁸² _i e._, He assumed one form of universal intelligence.

⁸³ A name of Indra from _Puru_ much _Huta_ worshipped or invoked.

⁸⁴ This refers to the celebrated episode of Pralhada. He was the son
 of the Demon king Hiranyakasipu. He began worshipping Vishnu who
 was an enemy of Hiranykasipu. He prosecuted his son in various
 ways and afterwards was killed by Vishnu in his man-lion form.

⁸⁵ A sacred fire perpetually maintained by a householder, received
 from his father and transmitted to his descendants, and from which
 fires for sacrificial purposes are lighted.

⁸⁶ The monthly Srāddha or funeral repast in honour of the manes held
 on the day of new moon.

⁸⁷ Gifts.

⁸⁸ Initiation.

⁸⁹ A vessel used at sacrifices for drinking the juice of the acid
 asclepias; a kind of ladle or spoon.

⁹⁰ A wooden mortar used for cleaning rice.

⁹¹ A species of grass used in many solemn and religious observances;
 hence called sacrificial grass.

⁹² A ladle with a double extremity or two oval collateral excavations
 made of wood and used to pour ghee upon the sacrificial fire.

⁹³ An object of immolation.

⁹⁴ A Sacrificial vase made in the shape of the Indian fig-leave, and
 of the wood of the Flacourtia sapida.

⁹⁵ Fit or proper to be offered in oblation. An offering to the gods.

⁹⁶ An oblation or offering of food to deceased ancestors.

⁹⁷ Hymns recited at the time of the celebration of a religious
 ceremony.

⁹⁸ A sacrificial post or pillar usually made of bamboos or the wood
 of the Khadira to which the victim at a sacrifice is bound.

⁹⁹ Fuel, wood, grass, &c., so employed for enkindling fire.

¹⁰⁰ A ladle or spoon.

¹⁰¹ The juice of a plant of the same name used for drinking purposes.

¹⁰² A wooden frame round the hole in which a sacrificial fire is
 lighted.

¹⁰³ Those who perform sacrifices.

¹⁰⁴ A kind of sacrifice.

¹⁰⁵ A measure of time equal to thirty Kalas or four minutes.

¹⁰⁶ A minute division of time, the sixtieth part of the twinkling of
 an eye.

¹⁰⁷ A measure of time the thirtieth part of a _Kala_ or eighteen
 twinklings of the eye.

¹⁰⁸ A division of time.

¹⁰⁹ A division of time, the thirtieth part of the day and night or an
 hour of forty-eight minutes.

¹¹⁰ A lunar day, one-thirtieth of a whole lunation.

¹¹¹ Three castes, Brāhmanas, or the priestly caste, Kshatriyas, the
 military caste and Vaishyas the mercantile caste.

¹¹² Three regions, heaven, earth and the region underneath the earth.

¹¹³ The three Vedas are Rik, Yajush and Saman.

¹¹⁴ Three fires are (1) _Dakshināgni_ or a kind of sacred fire that
 which is taken from the domestic or consecrated fire and is placed
 to the south (2) _Garhapatya_ or a perpetual domestic fire (3)
 _Ahavaniya_ _i.e._, a fire into which oblation is offered.

¹¹⁵ The three Kalas are the present, past and future.

¹¹⁶ The three-fold actions are those partaking of the quality of
 goodness, darkness, and ignorance respectively.

¹¹⁷ The three-fold means of attaining salvation are, the destruction
 of self, the acquisition of wealth and hard study.

¹¹⁸ The three-fold qualities are namely, those of goodness, darkness
 and ignorance.

¹¹⁹ Four classes of priests.

¹²⁰ Four stages of life namely that of a religious student, that of a
 householder, that of the anchorite, and that of the beggar.

¹²¹ (In anatomy) the blood before it receives the red particles, the
 Serum.

¹²² The meaning is; as the cloud increases by the help of smoke,
 light, water and air so the embryo is nourished by food, fire and
 water. The air mentioned here refers to the vital power. The soul
 enters in the shape of the vital power.