TITLE: INDRA COMES AND EULOGISES KRISHNA

Vaishampayana said:—Beholding the mount Govardhana thus held up and the
kine saved Purandara, the king of the celestials, was filled with great
surprise and felt a desire for seeing Krishna (1). And seated on his
elephant Airavata with temporal juice trickling down and resembling a
cloud without water he came down on earth (2). Purandara saw Krishna, of
unwearied actions, seated at the foot of the Govardhana hill (3). He saw
there the immortal Vishnu, assuming the guise of a milk-man and shining
in his great effulgence and attained to great delight (4). Sakra, having
many eyes, saw, with all his eyes, Krishna bearing the mystic mark of
Srivatsa and resembling a dark-blue lotus in hue (5). Beholding him
seated happily at the foot of the hill who was gifted with beauty and
was like an immortal in the land of mortals Sakra was ashamed (6).
Disappearing from view, that foremost of birds (Garuda), feeding on
serpents, was protecting him, seated at ease, against the rays of the
sun with his wings (7). Leaving behind his elephant, Indra, the slayer
of Bala, approached Krishna who was playing in the forest being engaged
in human actions (8). His face was embellished with a crown effulgent
like the sun that gives lustre to lightning, and with a pair of
celestial ear-rings. His breast was adorned with a neck-lace of five
layers of Padmakānta jewel constituting the ornament of the body.
Beholding Vāsudeva with his thousand eyes the powerful Vasava, the
wielder of thunder-bolt, approached Upendra and looked more beautiful
with his celestial garlands and pastes (9–11). Then with his sweet
voice, deep as the muttering of clouds that always issues commands to
the deities, he said (12):—

"O Krishna, O thou of large arms, O thou the enhancer of the delight of
thy kinsmen, what, thou hast accomplished on thy being pleased with thy
kine, is beyond the power of the gods (13). I have been highly pleased
with thy saving the kine from the clouds created by me which bring about
the dissolution of the world (14). Whose mind is not filled with
surprise on seeing thee hold up this best of mountains by thy
own-begotten Yoga power like a house in the sky(15)? O Krishna, I was
enraged on account of the suppression of my sacrifice. And therefore I
sent down this excessive rain extending over seven nights and
destructive of the kine which even the Devas and Dānavas cannot
withstand. But thou hast, by thy own power, put down this terrible
shower in my very presence (16–17). I am highly pleased, O Krishna, for
thy, in anger, settling the entire Vaishnava energy in thy human form
(18). On account of thy being endued with thy own energy although in a
human form, the work of the gods appears to have been well accomplished
(19). O hero, while thou art at the head of all the works of the gods
and their guide, forsooth, every thing will be accomplished and nothing
will remain undone (20). Thou art alone eternal amongst the gods and in
all other worlds. I do not see a second capable of carrying the weight
thou hast held (21). As the best of wheels is placed before a pole so
dost thou engage in relieving the distress of the gods sunk in an ocean
of misery, O thou having a bird for thy carrier (22). O Krishna, as gold
is among the metals, so this universe, created by the Grand-father
(Brahmā) exists, in thy body (23). As a cripple cannot follow one who
runs fast so even the Lord, Self-sprung (Brahma) cannot follow thee in
intelligence or age (24). As the Himalaya is amongst the mountains, as
the great ocean is amongst the watery expanses, as Garuda is amongst the
birds so thou art the foremost of the celestials (25). O Krishna,
underneath all is the region of water; above it are afloat the pillars
of the earth; above them is the region of man; above it is the etherial
region; above it is the effulgent region of the sun constituting the
gate of heaven; above it is the great region of the gods forming the
abode of the celestials; here I occupy the position of the king of gods;
above it is the Brahmaloka where the Brahmarshis live and where move
about the high-souled Soma (moon) and other luminous bodies. Above it is
the Goloka stationed in the great etherial region. O Krishna, Golaka is
the foremost of all regions and is protected by the Sādhyas. There dost
thou live carrying on _Tapas_ which we cannot learn even when accosting
the Grand-Father about it (26–31). This earth is the region of actions
for those who engage in them. Underneath it is the dreadful region of
the iniquitous (32). The etherial region is the refuge of moving objects
like the air and heaven is the excellent refuge of the pious endued with
the qualities of self-control and forbearance (33). Those, who worship
Brahmā, live in the Brahmaloka. Goloka is attainable only by the kine;
even by hard austerities no one else can obtain it (34). O intelligent
and heroic Krishna, in order to protect these kine, thou didst hold up
the mount Govardhana and suppress the calamities sent down by me (35).
Therefore at the request of the Grand Father and the cows and out of
respect for thee I have come here (36).

"O Krishna, I am the lord of Bhutas²³⁶ and of the gods and I am
Purandara. Being born of Aditi I am thy elder brother (37). Do thou
forgive me for displaying my own energy in the shape of clouds which is
but the outcome of thy power (38). O Krishna of the gait of an elephant,
be thou delighted now by thy own gentle energy and listen to the words
given vent to by Brahmā and the cows (39). Pleased with thy heavenly
deeds, hymning of their glories and with the work of protection the Lord
Brahmā and the cows of the sky have communicated this unto thee (40).
Thyself protecting the great Goloka region and all the cows, our race,
through the help of the bulls, will multiply itself (41). We all,
coursing at our will, shall propitiate the cultivators with bulls, their
beasts of burden, the celestials with the oblation of Havi and Sri with
the profusely increasing corns (42). O lord, O thou of great strength,
thou art our preceptor and saviour. Becoming our king and lord do thou
sprinkle thy self to-day with this golden jar full of heavenly water
brought by me with my own hands (43–44). I am the king of the celestials
and thou hast, although eternal, become now the king of the cows.
Therefore the people of this world will hymn thee as Govinda (45). As
the dignity of Indra has been bestowed on me so thou art the king of
cows. O Krishna, the gods will celebrate thy name as Upendra (46). Of
the four months of my rainy season, I confer the latter half
constituting the autumn on thee (47). From to-day people will recognize
the first two months as mine. After the termination of the rains they
will take down my flag and thou shalt receive adoration. Shorn of
excitement and emitting notes occasionally the peacocks will give up
their pride begotten by my clouds. And all other creatures, ranging in
my season and emitting notes at the view of clouds, will be silent
(48–49). Agastya, the regent of the star Canopus, will range like a bird
in the southern quarter and the sun, of thousand rays, will distress all
with his own effulgence (50). Thus with the beginning of autumn the
peacocks will become silent, the birds will hanker after water, the
frogs will desist from leaping, the brinks of the rivers will be filled
with swans and Sārasas, the Krounchas will emit their notes, the bulls
will become excited, the cows will be pleased and yield profuse milk,
the clouds will disappear after filling the earth with water, the cranes
will range in the dark sky, the picturesque lakes, pools and rivers will
be adorned with clean water and new grown lotuses, the dark-blue fields
will be full of corns, the rivers will have waters flowing in their
middle²³⁷ the hermitages of the ascetics will also be filled with
beautiful corns, the earth, abounding in many provinces, will grow
charming after the rains, the roads will look beautiful, the trees will
be covered with fruits, the country will be full of sugarcane and
Vajapeya and other sacrifices will be undertaken. And thus the sacred
autumn will set in. Thou shalt then get up from thy bed. Men in this
world and the immortals in the celestial region will worship me as
Mahendra and thee as Upendra in the flag-staffs on the earth (51-59).
The man, who reciting the great and eternal theme of our conduct as
Mahendra and Upendra, will bow unto us, will not be visited by any
misery" (60).

Thereupon taking those jars full of heavenly water the king of gods,
conversant with Yoga, sprinkled²³⁸ Govinda (61). Beholding the eternal
Krishna thus annointed, the cows, stationed in the celestial region,
along with the bulls, sprinkled him also with a downpour of their milk
through clouds (62). The clear clouds in the sky sprinkled him with
nectarine showers. From trees fell down moon-like drops of water. And
from the sky the gods set up a leonine sound, made a downpour of flowers
and blew the bugles (63–64). The Maharshis, who always follow _mantras_,
chanted his glories with becoming verses and the body of the earth was
separated from one all-extending ocean (65). The seas grew delightful
and the winds began to blow for bringing about the well-being of the
world. And the sun and the moon accompanied by stars stood in their
respective roads (66). The kings were freed of their enemies and the
calamity of excessive rain was pacified. And the trees were embellished
with leaves and flowers of various colours. The deer grew delighted in
the forest and the elephants began to yield temporal juice and the
mountains shone with trees grown on them and with metals (67–68). And
the land of mortals was satisfied with ambrosia-like juice like unto the
celestial region. Thus when the ceremony of the royal unction, of the
Lord Krishna, accompanied by the nectarine showers coming down from the
celestial region, was over the king of gods Purandara said to the
eternal Govinda, wearing celestial garlands and installed in the
sovereignty of the cows (69–70).

"O Krishna, the first work, of installing thee as the king of cows, is
now over. Listen now to the next object of my coming here (71). Slaying
speedily Kansa, the wretch of a horse Keshi, and Aristha, always
committing mischief do thou engage in governing thy own kingdom (72).
From thy father’s sister, a portion of my energy is born as a son by
name Arjuna. Contracting friendship with him do thou always protect him
(73). Thou shalt favour him and he, too, acting on thy advice and
following thee, will acquire great fame (74). He will be the foremost of
bowmen among the descendants of Bharata and will take after thee. And
without thy help he alone will never be pleased with his work (75). This
future war of Bharata²³⁹ depends on him and thee the foremost of men.
When you both will be united all the kings will be slain (76). O
Krishna, I have spoken to the gods and Rishis, that the son, begotten by
me on Kunti, will be an adept in the use of weapons, the foremost of
archers and the greatest of the Kurus. All the warrior-kings will speak
of his learning (77-78). Ever abiding by the duties of a Kshatrya he
alone will be able to kill one Akshouhini of kings skilled in fighting
(79). Save thee there is none among the kings or gods who will be able
to weaken the power of his bow or follow the path of his weapons, O lord
(80). O Govinda, he will be thy friend and help in battle. Therefore at
my request, do thou instruct him in spiritual knowledge (81). Thou dost
know well Arjuna and all the worlds. So thou shouldst always regard and
take care of him as thou dost me (82). If thou dost protect him in the
great battle Death will not be able to extend its influence over him
(83). O Krishna, know Arjuna as me and me as identical with thy own
self. As I am at one with thee, so is Arjuna (84). I am thy elder
brother and therefore thou didst, in the days of yore, acquiring the
three worlds from Bali with thy three footsteps, install me in the
sovereignty over the gods (85). I know thee as fond of truth, as having
truth for thy prowess and as identical with truth. And because thou art
bound to the gods by a promise they have engaged thee in this work of
the destruction of their enemies (86). O Krishna, Arjuna, the son of thy
father’s sister, is my son. As he did become thy companion in the days
of yore²⁴⁰ and so now he will contract friendship with thee (87). O
Mādhava, as a bull carries a burden, so thou shalt always take care of
him when either living in his house, your house or while fighting with
the enemies in the battle-field (88). When Kansa will be slain by thee,
ever observant of the real purpose of things there will take place a
great war of the kings (89). Arjuna will vanquish those heroic men of
superhuman deeds and thou shalt adorn him with glory (90). O Keshava, if
truth, myself and the celestials are thy favourites thou shouldst carry
out whatever I have said" (91).

Hearing the words of Sakra, Krishna, who had become a cow-keeper, with a
delighted mind replied (92). "O lord of Sachi, I am happy to see you.
Nothing, of whatever you have said, will be left off (93). O Sakra, I
know your heart. It is not unknown to me that my father’s sister has
been given away to the high-souled Pandu and that she has given birth to
Arjuna (94). I know also the prince Yudhisthira begotten by Dharma. I
know Bhimasena, the multiplier of Vāyu’s (wind-god’s) race. I know also
Nakula and Sahadeva begotten on Mādri by the two Aswinis²⁴¹ (95-96). I
know also Karna, now known as a charioteer’s son, begotten on my
father’s sister in her maidenhood by the Sun²⁴² (97). That Pandu is dead
on account of the thunder-like imprecation²⁴³ and that the sons of
Dhiitarashtra are desirous of fighting are all known to me (98), O king
of gods, returning now to the city of the celestials increase their
delight. No enemy will be able to trouble Arjuna when he will be before
me (99). When the great war of Bhārata will come to its close, I shall,
on account of Arjuna, consign unscathed unto Kunti all the sons of Pandu
(100). O king of gods, I am bound by affection and therefore I shall
accomplish like a servant what your son Arjuna will command me (101)."
Hearing these words of truthful Krishna, the king of gods returned to
the city of the celestials (102).

²³⁶ A demi-god of a particular class.

²³⁷ _i.e._ the waters will not overflood their banks as in the rainy
 season.

²³⁸ _i.e._ installed him as the king of cows. At the time of
 installation sacred water is sprinkled on the head of a king.

²³⁹ It refers to the battle of Kurukshetra in which all the kings of
 the world took part.

²⁴⁰ When Vishnu assumed the form of Nārayana Arjuna became his
 companion as Nara.

²⁴¹ For a detailed account of the birth of all these sons see chapter
 CXXIII of Adi Parva of Mahabharata.

²⁴² Kunti, while a maid, obtained a boon from the Rishi Durvasa that
 whomever she would wish to have as her consort, he would at once
 come to her. To make an experiment she invoked the sun and Karna
 is the issue of her union with him. The account of his birth is
 described in one hundred and eleventh chapter of Adi Parva in the
 Mahabharata.

²⁴³ Once on a time Pandu went out into a forest for hunting. He struck
 a Rishi’s son who was coupling with his mate in the form of a
 deer. He imprecated a curse on Pandu saying "As you have killed me
 in the form of a deer when I was full of desire, so you, O foolish
 man, will certainly meet with the fate that has fallen me. When
 you will go to your dear one, full of desire as was the case with
 me, you will at that time, certainly go to the land of the dead.
 Your wife will also follow you." See slokas 30, 31, in chapter
 CXVIII in Sambhava Parva of Adi Parva in the Mahabharata.