TITLE: THE ASURAS OBSTRUCTING A YAJNA

Vaishampāyana said:—At that time, O king, in the city of Shatpura on the
sacred bank of the good river Avarta, resorted to by the Munis, a
Vajasaneyi Brāhmana, by name Brahmadatta, a disciple of Yajnawalka,
well-read in the four Vedas and six Angas and endued with morality, was
initiated into a Yajna extending over a year (1-3). O kingly discendant
of Kuru, as Sakra (the king of gods) protects (their preceptor)
Vrihaspati so when that foremost of the twice-born went to Shatpura for
carrying on Yajna Vasudeva, with Devaki, repaired there for protecting
him, for he was a class friend and preceptor of Anakadundubhi (Vasudeva)
(4-5). In that Yajna of Brahmadatta, abounding in profuse food and
presents were present Vyasa, Yajnawalka, Sumantu, Jaimini, Dhritimān,
Jajali, Devala and other great and leading Munis of firm devotion. And I
too had gone there. In that Yajna, by the grace of Vasudeva, the creator
of the universe incarnated on earth, the pious Devaki distributed
amongst the beggars various articles they wanted proportionate to the
wealth of the intelligent Vasudeva. After the commencement of that
Yajna, the inhabitants of Shatpura, Nikumbha and other Daityas, proud of
their boon, assembled there and said:—"Give us our share in the Yajna.
We will drink Soma and Brahmadatta must give us his daughters. We have
heard that this great man has many beautiful daughters. So he must send
for them and give them over to us (6-11). He should also give us the
most valuable jems which he has got in his possession. If he
transgresses this order we will not allow him to celebrate this Yajna.
This is our order" (12). Hearing this Brahmadatta said to the great
Asuras:—"O ye leading Asuras, no portion of sacrificial offerings has
been laid down for you in the Vedas. How can I then allow you to drink
Soma in this Yajna? If you do not believe my words you may ask these
great Munis well-read in the Vedas and their commentaries. The daughters
whom I shall give away in marriage I shall confer upon proper
bridegrooms following the same Vedas with me; this is my resolution. If
you however come to terms I may give you the entire collection of my
jewels. If you show your force I will not give that even for Devaki’s
son is my supporter" (13-16).

Hearing those words the wicked Dānavas of Shatpura, Nikumbha and others
began to scatter the articles of Yajna and carry away his daughters.
Beholding the sacrificial articles robbed by the Asuras Anakadundubhi
thought of the great Krishna, Balabhadra and Gada. As soon as he was
thought of Krishna came to know of every thing and said to
Pradyumna:—"Proceed, O my son, and save the maidens by virtue of your
illusive powers. O powerful hero, I myself too will soon go to Shatpura
with the Yādava army."

Hearing it the intelligent, highly powerful and heroic Pradyumna, ever
obedient to his sire, went to Shatpura within a moment and took away the
maidens by virtue of his illusive power. Creating their figures by his
illusive power the pious son of Rukshmini kept them before the Daityas
and said to Devaki "Be not afraid". O king, leaving aside Brahmadatta’s
daughter the irrepressible Daityas carried away the illusory maidens and
entered their city with satisfaction (17–23).

Thereupon, O king, that great and glorious Yajna was being celebrated
according to proper rites. O descendant of Bharata, all the kings,
invited by the intelligent Brahmadatta, arrived at the sacrificial
ground. Jarāsandha, Shisupala, Dantavakra, the Pandavas, the sons of
Dhritarāshtra, the Mālava and Tangana kings, Rukshmi, Ahvriti, Neela,
Nārmada, Vinda, Anuvinda, Avantya, Shalya, Shakuni and other heroic,
noble and warrior kings encamped near Shatpura (24–28). Seeing this the
beautiful Nārada thought:—"At this Yajna all the Kshatryas and Yādavas
have assembled. Surely this will lead to a conflict. I shall therefore
try to bring it about." Thinking this he repaired to Nikumbha’s house
(29–30). He was worshipped there by Nikumbha and other Dānavas.
Thereupon taking his seat the pious-souled Rishi said to
Nikumbha:—"Having caused a dissension with the Yadavas how are you
sitting here at ease? Do you not know that Brahmadatta is the friend of
Krishna’s father (31–32)? The five hundred wives of the intelligent
Brahmadatta have been brought at the sacrificial ground for satisfying
Vasudeva’s son: of them two hundred are of Brāhmana origin, one hundred
of Kshatrya origin, one hundred of Vaishya and another hundred of Sudra
origin. O King, they had all worshipped the learned and pious Rishi
Durvāsā who had conferred on them all a boon saying ’You will all, one
by one, get a son and a daughter.’ O heroic Asura, by virtue of this
boon and on account of their intercourse with their husband they have
all given birth to fair daughters. They are of matchless beauty, tender,
ever youthful and chaste. From their body comes out the fragrance of all
flowers (33–38). O Daitya, by virtue of the boon of that intelligent
Rishi, they know the arts of singing and dancing, the accomplishments of
the Apsaras; and they are all well accomplished (39). The sons, in their
order, are observant of the duties attached to their respective orders.
They are clever in interpreting the the sacred texts and are beautiful
(40). O hero, the intelligent Brahmadatta had conferred almost all of
those daughters on the leading Bhaimas. And for the remaining hundred
whom you have stolen the Yādavas will fight to their very best.
Therefore O hero, you invite in proper order the help of other kings
(41–42). O Asuras, if you wish to keep in your possession Brahmadatta’s
daughters pray for the help of the highly powerful kings, giving them
various jewels and treat all the kings who will come here as your
guests." Thus addressed by Nārada the Asuras, with great delight,
carried out his orders (43–44).

Having obtained various jewels and five hundred devoted maidens the
kings divided them duly amongst themselves. Returning in a moment on the
other hand the great Nārada prevented the heroic sons of Pandu and so
they did not take any share in the distribution. Thereupon the leading
kings, delighted, said to the Asuras:—"Formerly the Kshatriyas had been
adored many times by celestial heroes like yourselves, capable of
coursing in the sky and possessed of all the objects of pleasure. And
even now they have been duly honored by you. What will they now give you
in return" (45-48)?

Hearing it Nikumbha, the enemy of the celestials, was filled with joy.
Describing the greatness and truthfulness of the Kshatriyas he said to
them:—"O ye leading kings, we shall have to fight with our enemies
to-day. We wish you may help us to the best of your power." O lord,
hearing the words of Nikumbha all the sinful Kshatriyas, save the heroic
sons of Pandu, who had learnt the truth from Nārada, said "So be it"
(41–51).

O king, on the other side, recollecting the words of Mahādeva in his
mind, the powerful Krishna set out with his army for Shatpura leaving
Ahuka at Dwarakā. Having arrived at Shatpura with that army the Lord
Vāsudeva, according to Vasudeva’s orders, encamped at an advantageous
site near the sacrificial ground for the well-being of the citizens.
Making that encampment difficult of access with bushes the powerful and
beautiful Krishna engaged Pradyumna in the work of patrolling (52–56).