TITLE: THE SAME STORY CONTINUED

Vaishampāyana said:—Thus on account of his Bhakti, mercy and promise²³
Satyavrata, ever stationed in humility, took charge of Vishwāmitra’s
offspring (1). Having killed wild deer, bear and buffaloes he used to
keep meat tied to the trees near the hermitage of Vishwāmitra (2). After
the king had left for the forest he, taking the vow of not taking
another’s wife, passed twelve years at the behest of his sire as a
probationer (3). On account of his being the royal priest the ascetic
Vashishtha protected the city of Ayodhyā and the kingdom (4). Satyavrata
too, on account of his childishness and future greatness, foolishly got
greatly enraged with Vashishtha (5). O king, when his father renounced
his own son Satyavrata, Vashishtha, for some reason, did not prevent
him.(6). By proceeding seven footsteps all the nuptial _mantras_ are
annulled. Satyavrata, however, could not hear those muttering prayers
(7). O descendant of Bharata, thinking "although Vashishtha is pious
still he is not saving me" Satyavrata got highly enraged with him (8).
Thinking well however the great Vashishtha did not prevent him then; but
Satyavrata could not understand his intention (9). His high-souled sire
was not satisfied with him and therefore the slayer of Pāka did not send
showers for twelve years (10). By carrying on those hard austerities now
on earth he is releasing his family (from that sin) (11). When he was
forsaken by his father Vashishtha did not prevent him because the
ascetic had in view of placing his (Satyavrata’s) son on the throne
(12). Carrying on hard austerities for twelve years, one day the
powerful prince Satyavrata, stricken with anger, ignorance, labour and
hunger, for not finding meat, saw the high-souled Vashishtha’s milch-cow
conferring the grant of all desires (13-14). O Janamejaya, possessed by
drunkenness, madness, exhaustion, anger, hunger, hastiness, cowardice,
avarice and lust he killed that cow (15). He himself took the meat and
made Vishwāmitra’s children partake of it. Hearing it Vashishtha was
enraged. The revered Rishi, worked up with anger, then said to the
prince (16). "O wicked man, I discharge at you this javelin (of sin); if
you had not two other javelins of sin (stuck to you) forsooth I would
not have discharged it²⁴ (17). You have committed threefold
transgressions, namely the incurring of your father’s displeasure, the
killing of your preceptor’s milch-cow and the eating of forbidden meat"
(18).

Vaishampāyana said:—The incurring of his father’s displeasure, the
killing of his preceptor’s cow and the eating of forbidden meat formed
as it were three javelins to him and therefore he was called Trishankhu
(19). After his return Vishwāmitra found his wife and children looked
after by him and pleased accordingly the ascetic conferred a boon on
Trishankhu (20). When that ascetic was about to confer a boon on him the
prince begged of him (the boon) of going bodily to heaven (21). Then the
fear of draught, extending over twelve years, was gone and the ascetic,
having installed him on the throne, began to act as his priest (22). The
all-powerful son of Kushika took him bodily to heaven in the presence of
all the gods and the great saint Vashishtha (23). He had a wife by name
Satyarathā born in the race of Kekayas. He begat on her the sinless
prince Harishchandra (24). The king Harishchandra was called
Traishankava.²⁵ Having celebrated a a Rajasuya sacrifice he became the
Lord Paramount (25). Harishchandra had a powerful son by name Rohita by
whom, for the advancement of his kingdom, the city of Rohitapura was
founded (26). Having governed his kingdom and the subjects and been
convinced of the worthlessness of the world the royal saint (Rohita)
gave away that city unto the Brāhmanas (27). Rohita’s son was Harita,
whose son was Chanchu who had two sons, by name Vijaya and Sudeva (28).
Vijaya defeated all the Kshatryas and therefore he got that name. His
son was Ruruka who was virtuous-souled and studied the Vedas (29).
Ruruka’s son was Vrika and of him was born Vahu. Haihaya, Talajangha and
other Kshatriya clans accompanied by Shaka, Javana, Kāmvoja, Pārada
Palhava and other clans discomfitted that king for he was not greatly
virtuous even in golden age (30–31). Vāhu’s son was born with poison and
therefore he was called Sagara. Coming to the hermitage of Aurva he was
protected by Bhārgava (32). O foremost of Kurus, having obtained a fiery
weapon from Bhārgava the pious king Sagara, endued with great strength,
slew all the Haihayas and Talajanghas, conquered all the world and put
down the religious practices of Shaka, Palhava and Pārada Kshatryas
(33–34).

²³ The promise refers to that of his no longer being a disciple of
 Vashishtha.

²⁴ This passage requires a little elucidation. He had already been
 visited by two transgressions, namely the incurring of his
 father’s displeasure and the killing of his preceptor’s cow. Now
 he commits another transgression, namely the eating of forbidden
 meat—these three transgressions are compared to three javelins.

²⁵ The son of Trishankhu.