TITLE: AN ACCOUNT OF RICHEYU’S FAMILY

Vaishampayana said:—The invincible king Richeyu had none to equal him.
His wife was Ivalanā, the daughter of Takshaka (1). That saintly queen
gave birth to the saintly emperor Matināra. He had three highly pious
sons (2). Of them the first was Tangsu, the second Pratiratha and the
youngest was Suvāhu. He had another well-known daughter by name Gouri
who was the mother of Māndhāta (3). They were all well-read in the
Vedas, conversant with the knowledge of Brahman, truthful, well-versed
in the use of arms, powerful and skillful in war-fare (4). O king,
Pratiratha’s son was Kanwa whose son was Medhātithi. From him the
twice-born ones derived the family of Kānyāyana (5). O Janamejaya, he
had a daughter by name Ilini. Tangsu, far more powerful than even the
Brahmavādins, espoused her (6). His son was the royal saint Surodha, who
propagated religion, was Brahmavādhin, powerful and heroic. His wife was
Upadānavi (7). She had four warrior sons. They were Dushmanta,
Sushvanta, Pravira and Anagha (8). The heroic Bharata was Dushmanta’s
son. (In his boyhood) he passed by the name of Sarvadamana, was
high-souled and gifted with the strength of ten million elephants (9).
Noble Dushmanta begat on Sakuntalā a son by name Bharata who became Lord
Paramount. From him you have all derived the name of Bhāratas (10). A
voice from heaven spoke to the king Dushmanta. "The mother is only a
leathern case. The son belongs to the father. He takes after him by whom
he is begotten (11). O Dushmanta, take care of your son and do not
disregard Sakuntalā. O king, a son, born of a portion of the father,
releases him from the abode of Death (12). Through you she has
conceived. Sakuntalā has spoken the truth." As described by me before
when the sons of the king Bharata were all destroyed by the anger of
their mother, the great ascetic Bharadwaja, the son of Angira’s son
Vrihaspati, was chosen as a son of Bharata by Marutas, the presiding
deities of Yajnas (13–14). This instance, of the Marutas assigning this
duty to the intelligent Bharadwāja on behalf of Bharata, is often cited
(15). Bharadwāja honored the Marutas with sacrifices. When the power of
procreating sons was withdrawn from Bharata, Bharadwāja begat a son
whose name was Vitatha. When his grandson Vitatha was born Bharata
repaired to heaven (16-17).

Thereupon placing Vitatha on the throne Bharadwāja retired into woods.
He again begat five sons-Suhotra, Suhota, Gaya, Garga and the
high-souled Kapila. Suhotra had two sons (18–19), the highly powerful
Kāshika and the king Gritsamati. The latter had sons amongst the
Brāhmanas, Kshatriyas, and Vaisyas (20). Kāshika’s sons were Kāsheya and
Dirghatapā; by the latter the learned Dhanwantari was begotten (21).
Dhanwantari’s son passed by the name of Ketumān. His son was the heroic
king Bhimaratha. His son was the celebrated king of Bārānashi by name
Divodāsa who slew all the Rākshasas (22–23). At this time, O king, a
Rākshasa, by name Kshemaka, depopulated the city of Bārānashi for the
high-souled and intelligent Nikumbha imprecated a curse against that
city saying that it would be without any inhabitants for one thousand
years. As soon as this curse was pronounced against the city of
Barānāshi the king Divodāsa laid a most beautiful city on the bank of
Gomati (24–25). Formerly the city of Bārānashi was in the possession of
the ascetic king Bhadrasenya born in the race of Yadu. Having slain his
hundred sons who were all excellent bowmen the king Divodāsa laid out
his kingdom there (26-27). The heroic king Pratardanna was Divodāsa’s
son. He had two sons, Vatsa and Bharga (28). Vatsa’s son was Alarka from
whom Sannatimān was born. Bhadrasenya’s son, the high-souled Durdama was
adopted by Haihaya as his son. He regained his ancestral kingdom that
was forcibly invaded by Divodāsa. He was out of mercy spared by
Divodāsa, who thought him a mere child (28–30). The king Ashtaratha was
the son of Bhimaratha. By putting an end to hostilities that Kshatriya
killed all the little boys of (Durdama). Alarka, the king of Kāshi, was
truthful and looked after the well-being of the Brāhmanas (31–32). That
youthful and beautiful king ruled over his kingdom for sixty thousand
and sixty hundred years (35). The king of Kāshi was endued both with
beauty and youth. By Lopamudrā’s favour he acquired a long life (34).
After the termination of the curse that mighty-armed king slew the
Rākshasa Kshemaka and laid out again the charming city at Bārānashi
(35). The king Sunitha was Alarka’s son. The highly illustrious Kshemya
was Sunitha’s son (36). Kshemya’s son was Ketumān whose son was
Varshaketu; the latter’s son was the king Bibhu (37). Bibhu’s son was
Anartha from whom was born Sukumāra. His son was the mighty car-warrior,
the highly energetic and pious king Satyaketu. From Vatsa his province
was called Vatsa and from Bhārgava his province was name Bhārga. These
were all born as the sons of Angiras in the Bhārgava race. O foremost of
Bhāratas, they were Brāhamanas, Kshatriyas and Vaishyas (38–40).

Suhotra’s son was Vrihat who had three sons, Ajamida, Dwimida and the
energetic Purumida. Ajamida had three beautiful wives namely Nilini,
Keshinā and the beautiful damsel Bhumini (41–42). Ajamida begat the
powerful Janhu on Keshni. He undertook the celebration of the great
sacrifice Sarvamedha. Gangā solicited him to become her husband. But on
his refusing to accept her proposals she flooded his sacrificial ground
(43–44), O foremost of Bharatas, beholding his sacrificial ground thus
flooded by Gangā, Janhu, the slayer of enemies, grew enraged and said to
her:—"O Gangā, I shall exhaust all your waters in the three worlds, by
drinking them. You will pay then dearly for your arrogance" (45–46).

Beholding Gangā then drunk up by Janhu the high-souled Rishis made her
his daughter by the name of Jānhavi (47). Janhu espoused Yuvanāshwa’s
daughter Kāveri. By imprecating a curse on her, Gangā afterwards
converted one-half of her body into a river (48). Janhu’s favourite son
was the emperor Balākāshwa (49). He was very fond of hunting. His son
was Kushika who grew up with the _Panhavas_ in the forest (50). Kushika
carried on hard austerities with the desire that he would obtain as
powerful a son as Indra. Therefore Sakra, out of fear, took his birth as
his son (51). Maghavān, born of his own accord in the race of Kushika,
passed by the name of king Gādhi. His sons were Vishwāmitra,
Vishwaratha, Viswajit and Viswakrit. O king, their youngest daughter was
Satyavati. Richika begat Jamadagni on her (52–53). Vishwamitra’s sons
Devarāta and others are celebrated over the three worlds. Hear their
names from me (54). Devashrava’s son was Kati from whom the Kātyayanas
received their name. Hiranyāksha was begotten on Shālāvatt and Renumān
on Renu (55). Besides, O king, there were Sangskritya, Galava and
Moudgalya. The families of those high-souled Koushikas are still
well-known (56). The Panis, Babhrus, Dhyanajāpyas, the king Devarāta and
others, Satangkayana, Soushrava, Louhitya, Yāmadulā, Karishis and
Sonshrutas were all descendants of Koushika. Besides there are
Saindhavayanas and others. They contract matrimonial alliances amongst
themselves according to the distinction of grades. O emperor, the
alliance, between the Brāhmana saints Koushikas and the Pouravas is
known as the intermarriage between the Brāhmanas and Kshatriyas. Amongst
the sons of Viswāmitra Sunasepha was the eldest (57-60). Although born
in the race of Bhrigu, that foremost of Munis attained to the station of
a Koushika. Viswāmitra had other sons too Devarāta and others (61).
Viswāmitra begat a son on Drishadvati by name Ashtaka whose son was
Louha. I have thus described the progeny of Janhu (62).

O foremost of men, hear of the other sons of Ajāmida. He begat Sushanti
on his wife Nilini (63). From Sushanti was born Purujāti from whom again
was Vāhyāshwa. The latter had five sons resembling the immortals (64).
They were Mudgala, the king Srinjaya, Vrihadishu, Yavanira and the
powerful Krimitāshwa (65). We have heard that the five of them were
capable of protecting their country—and they were the lords of the
Panchāla Province consisting of prosperous villages (66). Because the
five of them were capable of protecting their land therefore it is
called Panchala. Mudgala’s sons were the highly illustrious Moudgalyas
(67). They were all noble, twice-born and abided by the duties of
Kshatriyas. The descendants of Kanwa and Mudgala took the side of
Angiras (68). Mudgala’s eldest son was the highly illustrious Brāhmana
saint Indrasena from whom was born Badhyashwa (69). He begat twins on
Menakā; such we have heard. One of them was the royal saint Livodāsa and
the other was the illustrious Ahalyā (70). Sharadvāna begat on Ahalyā
the foremost of Rishis Shatanada. His son the highly illustrious
Satyadhriti was a master of the science of archery. Seeing a nymph
before him he was possessed by desire, the out-come of which was a twin.
Going out a-hunting the king Shāntanu, out of mercy, took them up.
Accordingly the son was named Kripa and the daughter Kripi, they are
called Shāradwatas and known as Goutamas (71–74).

I shall now describe the progeny of Divodāsa. The saintly king Mitreyu
was Divodāsa’s son (75). From him branched off the Matrayani line and
after him were named the Matreyas. These descendants of Bhrigu took the
side of Kshetropota (76). The high-souled Srinjaya had a son by name
Panchajana, whose son was the king Somadatta. His son was the highly
illustrious Sahadwa whose son was the king Somaka (77–78). When the
family was verging on extinction Somaka was again born of the twins of
Ajamida. His son was Jantu who had a hundred sons (79). Of them the
youngest was Prishata who was Drupada’s father. Drupada’s son was
Dhaistadyumna whose son was Dhristaketu (80). These high-souled Somakās
are known as Ajamidas. And the sons of the high-souled Ajamida became
known by the name of Somakas (81).

O king, the mother of your fore-fathers, Dhumini, desirous of having
sons, was the third queen of Ajamida (82). That lady, ever observant of
vows, practised, for having a son, hard austerities which it is
difficult for women to perform, extending over a million of years (83).
O Janamejaya, living on pure and restricted fare, offering duly oblation
to fire she used to lie down on Kusa grass intended for fire-worship.
Ajamida knew the lady Dhumini and she gave birth to a smoky coloured
beautiful son by name Riksha. From him was born Samvarana who again
begat Kuru, who passing by Prayaga, laid out the city of Kurukshetra
(84–85). After that high-minded king had carried on penances for many
thousand years and cultivated that holy and charming province resorted
to by the pious, Sakra conferred on him a boon. His family was highly
great from whom the Kouravas received their appellation (86–87). Kuru
had four sons, namely, Sudhanwa, Sudhana, the mighty armed Parikshit and
Pravara at whose name the enemies used to tremble (88). Sudhanwa’s son
was the intelligent Suhotra. His son was Chyavana who was well read in
the Vedas and other scriptures (89). Chyavana’s son was Krityajna.
Celebrating many sacrifices that pious king begat a son equal to Indra
in glory (90). He was Vasu the king of Chedis who could range in the sky
and move about in the air. He begat on Girika seven sons (91). They were
the mighty car-warrior Vrihadratha the king of Magadha, Pratyagraha,
Kusha, who passed by the name of Manivahana, Maruta, Yadu the fish Kāli
and Sattama. Vrihadratha’s son was known by the name of Kushāgra
(92–93). His son was the learned and powerful Brishabha whose son was
the pious Puspavāri. His powerful son passed by the name of king
Satyatulā (94-95). His son was the virtuous souled Urja whose son was
Sambhava. A powerful son was born to Sambhava in two portions which were
sewed up by Jarā. And this son was accordingly named Jarāsandha (96-97).
That highly powerful Jarāsandha defeated all the Kshatriyas. His son was
the powerful Sahadeva (98). His son was the beautiful and highly
illustrious Udayu who begat a highly pious son (99). His name was
Srutadharmā who lived in the country of Magadha. Parikshita’s son was
the pious Janamejaya (100). He had three sons who were all mighty
car-warriors; they were Srutasena, Ugrasena and Bhimasena (101). They
were all highly prosperous, powerful and brave. Besides these three sons
Janamejaya begat on Manimati another two who were named Suratha and
Matimān (102). Suratha’s son was the powerful Viduratha whose son was
the mighty car-warrior Riksha (103). Though he was the second Riksha he
was illustrious like the first. O king, in your family were born two
Rikshas, two Parikshits, three Bhimasenas and two Janamejayas. Riksha
the second had a son by name Bhimasena whose son was Pratipa. His sons
were Shāntanu, Devapi and Vālhika who were all mighty car-warriors
(104-106).

O king, the family, in which you have been born, is Shāntanu’s family. O
king, Valhika had seven kingdoms (107). Valhika’s son was the highly
illustrious Somadatta whose sons were Bhuri, Bhurishrava and Shala
(108). The ascetic Devapi was the priest of the gods. He was the
favourite son of the high-souled Chyavana (109). The king Shāntanu was
the foremost of the Kuru kings. The family in which, O great king, you
have been born as Shāntanu’s race (110). He begat on Gangā a son by name
Devavrata. He was celebrated by the name of Bhishma the grand-father of
the Pāndavas (111). Kāli (Satyavati) gave birth to Vichitravirya who was
the most favourite, virtuous-souled and sinless son of Shāntanu (112).
Krishnadwaipāyana begat on Vichitravirya’s wife Dhritarāstra, Pāndu and
Vidura. Dhritarastra begat on Gāndhāri a hundred sons, of whom
Duryodhana was the eldest and became king (113-114). Pandu’s son was
Dhananjaya whose son was Abhimanyu who was given birth to by Subhadrā. O
king, your father Parikshit is Abhimanyu’s son (115). O king, such is
the account of the Puru race in which you have been born. I shall
presently describe the families of Turvasu, Drahyu, Puru and Yadu (116).
Turvasu’s son was Vanhi, whose son was Gobhānu, whose son was the
irrepressible king Traisānu. His son was Karandhama whose son was
Marutha. I have mentioned before the name of another Marutta who was the
son of Avikshit. This king Marutta had no issue and accordingly he
celebrated many Yajnas accompanied with profuse presents. O king, he had
a daughter by name Sarmatā. He made a gift of her to the high-souled
Samvarta. Afterwards he obtained the sinless Puru king Dushmanta as his
son (117-120).

O foremost of kings, thus on account of Yayāti’s curse and of his
transferring of his decrepitude Turvasu’s line became identified with
that of Kurus. Dushmanta’s son was the king Karuthāma whose son was
Akrida. He (again) had four sons whose names were Pāndya, Kerala, Kola
and Chola. Their prosperous territories were respectively named Pāndya,
Chola and Kerala. O king, Drahyu’s sons were Babhru and Setu. Setu’s son
was Angāra who was also known as lord of Maruts. That powerful king was
slain, with difficulty, by Youvānāshwa in battle. He fought with him a
dreadful combat for fourteen months (121-125). The king Gāndhāra was
Angāra’s son, after whose name the celebrated Gāndhāra kingdom still
passes. The horses of that province are the best of their kind. Anu’s
son was Dharma whose son was Ghrita. Ghrita begat Duduha whose son was
Prachetā. Suchetā was Prachetā’s son. I have thus described the family
of Anu. Hear, I shall now describe at length the most excellent and
powerful family of the eldest Yadu (126-129).