TITLE: THE FIGHT BETWEEN THE GODS AND DEMONS

Thereupon there took place a terrible encounter between the armies of
the gods and demons desirous of vanquishing each other (1). Armed with
various weapons the Dānavas fought with the gods as if the mountains
were fighting with the mountains (2). Thus there took place a wonderful
encounter between the gods and demons, with fairness and unfairness,
humility and pride (3). Then there fell on all sides from the sky cars
drawn by quick-coursing horses, and soldiers with swords in their hands.
Maces were scattered all over. With these and arrows, full drawn bows
and clubs that war, of the gods and demons, grew exceedingly terrible.
It created terror all over the world and assumed a dreadful form like
the whirling clouds at the hour of the universal dissolution (4–6).
Throwing with their hands Parighas and stones the Dānavas began to
assail Indra and the other gods in battle (7). In that great encounter
the gods were greatly assailed by the highly powerful Dānavas with whom
appeared all the signs of success and their (faces) grew pale. They were
grinded by the network of weapons of Diti’s sons; their heads were cut
off by their Parighas, their bodies were mutilated and the wounds made
copious discharges of blood (8). Being fettered by the nooses of the
Danavas, wounded by their arrows and possessed by the illusions of their
women the gods stood motionless (10). They were stupified and showed no
signs of life. The Asuras made the celestial army inert so that they
could not use their weapons (11).

Throwing away the nooses of illusion of the Dānavas, withstanding and
cutting off their arrows with his thunder-bolt the thousand-eyed king of
gods entered into the dreadful army of the Dānavas (12). Having slain
all the Daityas who were stationed in front with his dark weapons he
covered the entire demon-army with darkness. Being thus enshrouded with
darkness through the energy of the king of gods they could not make any
distinction between the gods and demons. Thereupon being freed from the
nooses of illusion and being very careful the gods began to slay the
Dānavas who were overpowered with darkness. Thereat being assailed,
bereft of consciousness and dark-hued on account of the darkness, the
Dānavas began to fall down like mountains having their wings cut off
(13–16). Then the palace, of the king of Dānavas, consisting of
cloud-like demons and resembling an ocean stricken with darkness,
appeared as the very form of darkness itself (17). Thereupon consuming
that illusion of darkness the Dānava Maya created a highly dreadful
illusion of forest-fire resembling the fire of dissolution. When that
illusion, created by Maya, destroyed all darkness, the Daityas, assuming
forms, effulgent like the sun, again appeared in that battle-field
(18-19).

Being consumed by the illusory forest-fire the gods appeared before Soma
lying on the dews. Having their lustre destroyed by the forest-fire and
been consumed thereby the gods, stricken with grief and seeking refuge,
communicated it to their king the holder of thunder-bolt. When the
celestial soldiers were assailed by the illusion of Maya and consumed by
the Dānavas, Varuna, commanded by the king of gods, thus said (20–22).

Varuna said:—O king of gods, in the days of yore, the energetic Urva,
the son of the Brāhmana saint Bhrigu, adorned with accomplishments like
those of Brahmā, practised hard austerities. Like the eternal sun he
assailed the whole world with his penances. The Brāhmana saints, with
the gods and ascetics, appeared before him (23–24). The Dānava-king
Hiranyakasipu communicated it to that highly energetic Rishi (25). The
Brāhmana saints then addressed to him the following sacred words; "This
family, of the Rishis, is about to be extinct now, since, you, being
alone and having no issue, are not thinking of perpetuating your race.
Adopting a life of celibacy you are practising these hard penances
(26–27). Many familes of self-controlled Rishis, are on the verge of
extinction on account of the absence of of any offspring. Only one body
exists (28). If all these families disappear for want of descendants
there is no chance of their being multiplied. You are the foremost of
ascetics and are effulgent like Brahmā (29). Therefore think of
multiplying your race and you yourself multiply yourself. Devote your
great energy and produce your second body (30)."

Thus addressed by the Rishis and having his mind agitated that
self-controlled ascetic blamed them and said (31).

"This had been laid down in the days of yore as the eternal duty of the
Munis living in the forest on roots and following the religion of the
Aryans (32). The well-practised vow of celibacy of the Brāhmanas, born
from Brahmā, agitated even Brahmā himself. To officiate as priests, to
teach and to accept fees are the three-fold duties of the Brāhmanas
living as house-holders. To live in the forest is our duty who,
(observing the vow of celibacy) live in hermitage (33-34). Practising
hard penances and giving preference to chastity in thought, words and
deeds, the Munis, living on water, those living on air, the
Dantolukhalikas,¹⁵⁴ Ashmakuttas,¹⁵⁵ Dashanapās,¹⁵⁶ and Panchatapās,¹⁵⁷
attain to the most excellent state (35-96). Through this chastity in
thought, words and deeds the Brāhmanas attain to their Brāhmanahood. The
Brahmavādins, living in the most excellent region, have recorded this
(37).

"Patience resides in Brahmacharyya,¹⁵⁸ asceticism exists in
Brahmacharyya and those Brāhmanas, who practise it, attain to the
celestial region (38). Without Siddhi,¹⁵⁹ there is no yoga, and without
yoga there is no fame. There is no other glorious asceticism in this
world than Brahmacharyya (39). Having subdued the five elements and five
organs of sense one should practise Brahmacharyya. What other greater
Tapas is there than Brahmacharyya (40)? The shaving of the hairs in the
absence of yoga which the Sanyasins are bound to practise, the
observance of the difficult (Chandrāyana) vow (for pleasing the people)
in the absence of determination (to go to the next world), the practice
of religion in the absence of Brahmacharyya—these three are designated
as Dambha¹⁶⁰ (41). When Brahmā created his mind-begotten progeny where
had he his wife and where was his co-habitation and where was the
agitation of his mind (42)? You, self-controlled Rishis, have a great
ascetic energy. Therefore create your mind-born progeny by your
patriarchal works (43). The ascetics should procreate progeny through
their mind-born source. They should not marry and beget children on
their wives (44). What you have said, being yourselves all pious men,
about the different religious practices, appears to me as thoroughly
immoral (45). By this my effulgent body consisting of soul and identical
with mind, I shall pro-create a son, begotten of my body, without
espousing a wife (46). By the forest, regulations¹⁶¹ I shall create, out
of this body of mine, a second body capable of consuming the creatures
(47)."

Thereupon being engaged in Tapas and placing his thigh into the fire
Urva began to churn an _Arani_,¹⁶² capable of giving a son, with a
_Darbha_.¹⁶³ Thereupon all on a sudden enveloped with flames there came
out the fire in the shape of a son desirous of consuming the universe
(48-49). Riving the thigh of Urva there came into being the all-ending
and the wrathful fire Aurva as if desirous of consuming the three worlds
(50).

As soon as he was born, he said to his father in burning words:—"O
father, I am stricken with hunger. Leave me, I shall eat up the whole
world (51)". At that time yawning with flames that had gone up to the
celestial region the all-ending fire completely consumed the ten
quarters and all the elements and thus increased itself (52). In the
meantime the Lord Brahmā, the master of all creatures, went where that
Muni begat that most excellent son (53). He saw there the worlds along
with the Rishis blazing up with the thigh-begotten fiery son of Urva and
assailed by Aurva’s fire of anger (54).

Thereupon honouring the Rishi Urva Brahmā said to him:—"Bear this energy
of your son out of compassion for the world (55). O Vipra, I shall
confer upon this son of yours the most excellent virtue of patience. And
I shall bestow on him the best of habitations and nectarine food. Hear
these my truthful words, O foremost of speakers" (56).

Urva said:—"Blessed I am. I have received a great favour since the Lord
has conferred a great grace on my child and given him this inclination
(57). How will this my son, when he will attain to the desirable youth,
acquire happiness on being honoured with Havyas? Where will be his house
and what will be his food? What sort of food will you arrange for this
highly powerful one commensurate with his strength (58–59)."

Brahma said:—This boy will live in the mouth of the ocean resembling
that of a mare. O Vipra, I am born of water, so his body will be made of
water (60). Always living on watery food I live in the water. I shall
give your son this food. Let him bring it (61). O you of firm vows, at
the time of the termination of a yuga this fire will consume all the
worlds. United with him I shall repeatedly eat up the worlds (62). This
fire has been made by me to live upon the water of dissolution. He will
consume all the creatures with the gods, Asuras and Rākshasas (63).
Saying "So be it," and casting off his effulgence before his father
Aurva, enveloped with consecrated flames of fire, entered into the mouth
of the ocean (64).

Thereupon Brahmā and other great Rishis returned to their respective
habitations. And being informed of the power of Aurva fire they resorted
to their respective courses (65). Beholding the wondrous affair
Hiranyakasipu, placing all his limbs on the ground, worshipped Urva and
said the following words (66) "O Reverend Sir, wonderful is this affair
that has been witnessed by all the worlds. O foremost of Munis, the
grand-father has been pleased with your penances (67). O you of great
vows, if I am worthy of being praised for my actions know me as your and
your son’s servant (68). Behold me as engaged in worshipping you. If I
meet with discomfiture, O foremost of Munis, it will be your defeat
(69)."

Urva said:—"I have been also blessed and honored since you have accepted
me as your preceptor. O you of firm vows, you have no longer any fear of
ascetic observances (70). Do you take this fiery illusion which even the
fires, without fuels that have been created my son, cannot easily touch
(71). This illusion will help you in killing the enemies of your family;
it will protect your own army and consume the enemies" (72).

Saying ’may it be so’ and saluting that foremost of Munis Hiranyakasipu,
the king of Dānavas, was pleased and returned to the celestial region
(73).

Varuna said:—This is that illusion, which the deities cannot bear, and
that had been created in the days of yore by Urva’s son Aurva (74). With
the death of that Daitya it has undoubtedly been shorn of its power. It
had been imprecated with a curse in the days of yore by him who had
created it (75) If we can strike against this illusion the king of gods
will be happy. Give me, O Sakra, my friend Nishakara (the moon) who is
born of water (76). Being united with him and Yados¹⁶⁴ and controlling
my senses, I shall by your favour, undoubtedly destroy this illusion
(77).

¹⁵⁴ One who eats grain without its having been threshed, anchorite.

¹⁵⁵ Breaking or bruising anything with a stone.

¹⁵⁶ Those who practise penances on the peak of a mountain.

¹⁵⁷ Those who practise penances in the midst of fire.

¹⁵⁸ Chastity in thought, words and deeds.

¹⁵⁹ The consummation of the Yoga practices and the attainment of the
 object thereof.

¹⁶⁰ It means here hypocrisy.

¹⁶¹ Regulations observed by Rishis living in the forest.

¹⁶² Wood for kindling a fire exciting it by attrition.

¹⁶³ Kusa or sacrificial grass.

¹⁶⁴ Aquatic animals.