TITLE: KRISHNA’S REPLY TO UGRASENA

Vaishampayana said:—Breathing like a person who has drunk poison,
Ugrasena, burning with grief for his son, approached Krishna (1). He saw
him there encircled by Yadavas repenting for his sinful destruction of
Kansa (2). Hearing the heart-rending lamentations of Kansa’s wives he,
censuring his own self in that assembly of the Yādavas, (said)
(3):—"Alas, out of my childish freak and under the influence of anger, I
have, by the destruction of Kansa, made widows of these thousand women
(4). On the death of their husband these women are bewailing so very
plaintively that even an ordinary man’s heart, on hearing it, feels
compassion (5). Hearing the lamentations of these guileless women, even
Kritānta’s (Regent of the dead) heart is filled with pity (6). I had
determined before that Kansa, the oppresser of the pious, and always
given to vice, should be slain (7). Death is preferable to life unto him
who, in this world, is of a degraded conduct, ruthless temper, feeble
understanding and whom the people hate (8). Kansa was highly sinful,
never liked by the pious and him every one used to hate. What pity
should then be felt for him (9)? The ascetics, as a fruit of their
virtuous deeds, live in the celestial region. He, who attains to glory
in this world, is also like a dweller in heaven (to). If the subjects
are self-controlled, observant of their own duties and perform pious
deeds, unrighteousness can never touch the king (11). Those, who are
wicked, are constrained by Death to reap the proper fruits. The pious
attain to auspicious fruits in the next world (12). Many are the agents
of impious deeds in these worlds and therefore the gods perfectly
protect the pious (13). That Kansa has been slain by me should be
considered by you as righteous for I have eradicated (thereby) his
mis-deeds (14). Do you now console the sorrowful women, the citizens and
the merchants (15)."

When Krishna said this, Ugrasena, out of fear for his son’s misdeeds,
entered lowering his head along with other Yadavas (16). In that
assembly of the Yadus he addressed to the lotus-eyed Krishna the
following poor words, sullied by the vapour of grief and becoming the
occasion (17):—"O my son, your anger has been pacified, your enemy has
been led to the abode of Yama, your glory has followed your own duties
and your name has become celebrated in this world (18). By this action
you have established your glory amongst the pious, terrified your
enemies, made strong the position of the Yādavas and rendered your
friends proud (19). Your glory has spread itself amongst the
neighbouring chiefs and now they will all seek alliance with you and
your friendship (20). O hero, your subjects will be devoted to you, the
Brāhmanas will sing your glories and the ministers, well read in peace
and dissension making, will bow unto you (21). O Krishna, accept this
immortal army of Kansa abounding in elephants, horses, chariots and
infantry (22). O Mādhava, let your men take Kansa’s wealth, corn,
jewels, covers, gold, clothes, women and all that he possessed (23). O
Krishna, the slayer of your enemies, by the Yoga, to which you have
resorted on behalf of the Yādavas, all dissensions have been put a stop
to and the earth has been established. O descendant of Yadu, from you
now will proceed the happiness or misery of the Yadavas (24). Hear, what
they are saying with a depressed heart. If you please, O Govinda, they
may perform the obsequial rites of Kansa, of sinful deeds, who has been
consumed by the fire of your anger. Having performed the after-death
ceremonies of that king who has met with this calamity, I shall, along
with my wife and daughters-in-law, range in the forest with the animals.
To perform the obsequial rites of the dead is the duty of men (26–28).
By performing this, Krishna, people are freed from their social
obligations. Therefore having made his funeral pyre, putting fire to it
and offering oblation of water I shall have discharged debt to Kansa
(29). This is my only prayer, O Krishna. Show me kindness in this
matter. With the performance of his after-death rites let sinful Kansa
attain to a blessed state (30)."

Hearing the words of Ugrasena, Krishna was filled with surprise. And
consoling him he said (31). "O sire, O foremost of kings, what you have
said behoves your age and family and becomes your nature (32). While the
inevitable work is over, why do you say so? Although dead, Kansa will
receive funeral honors befitting a king (33). O sire, you are born in a
great race and know every thing that should be known. Why do you not
then understand that destiny is inevitable (34)? O king, pristine deeds
of all creatures, mobile and immobile, attain to fullness in time (55).
O foremost of kings, even the liberal, beautiful and rich sovereigns,
always kind to the poor, endued with prowess like that of Mahendra, well
read in Srutis, laws and knowledge of Brahman, and like unto the regents
of quarters, are carried away by Death (36–37). You know too that many a
pious king, ever intent on protecting their subjects, devoted to
Kshitriya dutes, self-controlled and well-read in all, meet with death
in time (38). When the proper time comes men, by enjoyment or suffering,
can understand whether his actions have been good or bad (39). O king,
even the gods cannot understand the true nature of Māyā that exists in
the hearts of all. Karma is the instrument of people’s being stupified
thereby (40). Urged on by his pristine deeds Kansa has met with death in
time; I am not the cause thereof. Karma (pristine action) and Kāla
(Time) are the instruments thereof (41). This universe, consisting of
the sun and moon, mobile and immobile creations, meets with dissolution
in time and springs up into existence again in time (42). Time subdues
and favours all and therefore all the creatures are subject to time
(43). O king, your son has been consumed by his own sin. I am not the
instrument thereof but Time is the cause (44). Your son has been slain
by his own actions; I am surely the instrument no doubt (45). Powerful
is Time and it is difficult to know its course. This is known to persons
who impartially look into the essence of things (46). That is the course
of Time by which everything comes within its ken. Let it go, do what I
say now (47).

"I do not care for the kingdom or the royal throne. I did not slay Kansa
for a territory (48). For the behoof of all the worlds and for
establishing my glory your son, the curse of this family, has been slain
by me along with all his attendants (49). Like unto a bird coursing at
will, I shall again delightedly range in the forest in the midst of kine
along with the Gopas (50). O foremost of kings, I swear a hundred times,
that I stand in no need of the kingdom. Communicate this to all (51) O
foremost of kings, you are the leader and the lord of the Yadavas and
therefore deserve respect from me. Therefore place yourself on the
throne and acquire victory by becoming the king (52). If you think it
proper to do what pleases me, and if it does not pain you, do you accept
for ever this kingdom abdicated by me (53)."

Vaishampāyana said:—Hearing those words of Krishna in the assembly of
Yadus Ugrasena bent down his head in bashfulness and could give no reply
(54). Then Govinda, well read in laws, installed him on the throne. With
the crown on his head the beautiful and effulgent king Ugrasena, along
with Krishna, performed the funeral ceremonies of Kansa (55). As the
celestials follow their king (Indra) so all the leading Yadavas, at the
command of Krishna, followed Ugrasena in the high-way of the city (56).
Thereupon when the night passed away and the sun rose, the leading
Yadavas began to perform the funeral ceremonies of Kansa (57). Thereupon
desirous of performing the obsequial rites of king Kansa according to
the ritualastic laws they placed his body in a palanquin and took it to
the northern bank of Yamunā. And in due order they performed his funeral
rites by setting fire to the pyre (58–59). With the consent of Krishna
the Yādavas also performed the funeral ceremonies of the large-armed
brother of Kansa by name Sunāma (60). Then repeatedly exclaiming. "May
the departed attain to an eternal course" the Vrishnis, Andhakas and
Yadavas offered oblations of water in their honor (61). Having then
offered water to Kansa and his brother, all the Yadavas, preceded by
Ugrasena, returned to Mathura with a sorrowful heart (62).