TITLE: PRADYUMNA APPEARS BEFORE PRABHAVATI AND MARRIES HER

Vaishampāyana said:—Afterwards thinking "This maiden has been completely
possessed by me." Krishna’s son delightedly said to the goose:—"Tell the
daughter of the Daitya king, that in the guise of a black-bee, I have
come here along with other black-bees, attached to the garland (1-2). I
am now at present under her command. Let her do what she likes to do
with me." Saying this, the beautiful husband of Rati appeared there in
his own form (3). At that time the house was lighted up with the
effulgence of the person of the intelligent Madana. And the beautiful
rays of the moon were put to shame (4). As the lord of waters (the
ocean) rises with the lord of night (moon) on a Parva day, so
Prabhāvati’s ocean of love increased on seeing Kāma (5). Then turning
her eyes a little with bashfulness, Prabhāvati, having eyes like
lotuses, sat there with her face cast down (6). Seeing it Pradyumna
held, with his own, the hands of thin-built and beautiful Prabhāvati
bedecked with handsome ornaments. Then with hairs of his body standing
erect he said:—"Why have you cast down your face resembling the
full-moon and acquired after desiring for it a hundred times? Why do you
not speak with me (7-8) O you of a fair face, do not crush the
effulgence of your countenance. Cast off your fear and favour this
servant of yours. There is no more time, O timid girl. The hour for my
return has well-nigh arrived. I pray to you with folded hands, shake off
your fear. As you are peerless in beauty and fidelity so according to
the condition of time and place favour me by a Gandharva marriage"
(9-11).

Thereupon touching fire existing in the jem (he put on) and reciting the
_mantra_ the Bhaima hero Pradyumna performed the _Homa_ ceremony with
flowers. Thereupon holding Prabhāvati by the arm embellished with most
excellent ornaments he circumambulated the fire of the jem (12–13). O
king, at that time to keep the honor of Achyuta’s son, Hutāshana, the
divine lord of effulgence, the witness of virtue and sin in the world,
blazed up. Thereupon settling in his mind about the _Dahshinā_
(money-gift) the heroic descendant of Yadu said to the goose:—"O bird,
remaining at the gate, do you guard us" (14–15). Hearing it the goose
saluted him and went away. Afterwards spending the whole night he, early
in the morning, went to the theatre. Although reluctant Prabhāvati gave
him farewell, and he too, thinking in his mind of the beauty of his
love, went away. Thus awaiting the orders of Indra and Keshava, the
Bhaimas, for the great work, lived there disguised as actors. Keeping
the secret close those high-souled ones awaited the hour when Vajranābha
would go out for conquering the three worlds. O king, as long as
Kashyapa was engaged in his sacrifice so long there did not take place
any dissension between the high-souled and virtuous celestials and the
Asuras ready for conquering the three worlds (16–24).

Thus while the intelligent Yādavas were waiting there for the proper
hour there appeared the rainy season delightful to all creatures (25).
The swans, fleet like the mind, used daily to carry the intelligence of
the highly powerful princes to Shakra and Keshava. Thus well protected
by those Dhārtarashtras the highly powerful Pradyumna used to spend
every night with the beautiful Prabhāvati (26–27). The Asuras, possessed
by Death, could not perceive that they had been surrounded by the swans
and actors in the city of Vajra at the command of Vāsava (28). By and
by, well protected by the swans the heroic son of Rukshmini began to
spend even the day in Prabhāvati’s house (29). O descendant of Kuru, on
account of his illusory powers, one half of his body used to appear on
the stage—and with the other half he lived with Prabhāvati. The Asuras
used to envy the high-souled Yadavas for their prosperity, humility,
character, sportiveness, cleverness, simplicity and learning. Their
women used to envy the Yādava women for their beauty, luxury, scents,
pure words and conduct (30–32).

O king, Vajranābha’s illustrious brother Sunābha had two beautiful and
accomplished daughters—one of them was named Chandravati, and the other
Gunavati. They daily used to go to Prabhāvati’s house (33–34). One day
seeing Prabhāvati engaged in love affairs in her house they asked her
about it on account of their confidence in her love for them (35). She
said:—"I possess a learning which can soon bring a desired-for husband
and gives prosperity. It has such a wonderful power, that whoever, may
he be a Dānava or god, is thought of he at once comes losing all control
over himself. By the power of this learning I sport with the son of a
god. See, by my power, Pradyumna has become my most favourite." Seeing
him, endued with beauty and youthfulness, they were filled with wonder
(36–38). Afterwards smiling gracefully the beautiful Prabhāvati again
addressed to her sisters words suited to the time:—"The gods are always
engaged in virtuous acts, ascetic penances and are truthful: on the
other hand the great Asuras are haughty, fond of pleasures and
untruthful. So the gods are superior, for victory is there where reign
virtue, asceticism and truth (39–41). I will instruct you in this
learning; you may select two celestial youths as your becoming husbands.
By my power you will soon get them" (42).

Hearing it the two sisters said to Prabhāvati having beautiful eyes "So
it will be." Thereupon when the honorable daughter of Vajranābha asked
Pradyumna about it he mentioned the names of his uncle Gada and the hero
Shāmva for both of them were beautiful, accomplished and valiant
(43-44).

Prabhavati said:—Formerly pleased with me Durvāsa conferred on me this
learning: it gives good luck and always preserves maidenhood (45). The
great saint said: "He, whom amongst the gods, Dānavas and Yakshas you
will think of, will be your husband. I desired for this hero. Do you
take this learning and you will in no time be united with your loves."

Thereupon, O king, those two beautiful daughters of Sunābha, filled with
joy, accepted the learning from the mouth of their sister and practised
it. Then they thought of Gada and Shāmva. Covered with illusion by
Pradyumna those two heroic Bhaimas entered there with him. Those two
heroes, fond of the pious and the slayers of their enemies, espoused
them according to Gandharva rites after reciting the _mantras_. Of them
Gada married Chandravati and Keshava’s son Shāmva Gunavati. Thus
awaiting the orders of Sakra and Keshava those leading Yadus lived there
happily with Asura girls (46-51).