TITLE: AN ACCOUNT OF VABHRU’S FAMILY

Vaishampayana said:—O king, Sātwata, endued with the quality of
goodness, begat on Koushalyā several sons, namely Bhajina, Bhajamāna,
Divya, Devavridha, the mighty armed Andhaka, and Yadu’s son Vrishni.
Listen to a detailed account of theirs progenitors (1-2). Bhajamāna had
two wives, daughters of Srinjaya, by name Vāhyakā and Upavāhvakā. He had
a number of sons by those two wives. Krami, Kramina, Drishta, Shura and
Puranjava were begotten on Vāhyka. And Ayutajit, Sahasrājit, Shatajit,
and Dāsaka were begotten on Srinjaya’s daughter Upavāhvakā by Bhajamana
(3-5). Resolving "I must have a son endued with all accomplishments" the
king Devavridha, the performer of Yajnas, carried on hard austerities
(6). Controlling his mind he used to bathe in the water of the river
Parnāshā and rinse his mouth there with. On account of his constant
touch, the river accomplished what he liked (7). Thinking alone, that
foremost of rivers Parnāshā resolved upon doing some good by that king.
Meditating thus she could not set his eye upon a woman capable of giving
birth to such an accomplished son. She accordingly made up her mind to
become herself the wife of that king (8–9). Thereupon becoming a maiden
and assuming a most handsome form she selected that king as her husband.
He too liked her (10). She then conceived through that liberal-minded
king. In the tenth month, she, from king Devāvridha, gave birth to a
highly accomplished son by name Vabhru. In this family while describing
the accomplishments of the noble Devāvridha the sages, well-read in the
Puranas, used to say:—Before us, at a distance from us and near us we
behold the king Devavridha range assuming various forms by virtue of his
illusive energy (11-13). Vabhru was the foremost of men, and Devāvridha
was equal unto the celestials. Being slain in battle by Devāvridha and
Vabhru four hundred and sixty two thousand men attained to the region of
Brahma. Vabhru celebrated many Yajnas, made away gifts, was learned and
conversant with the knowledge of Brahman. His weapon was very strong.
Besides he was of glorious deeds, highly effulgent and the foremost of
Sātwatas. His family was extensive and his descendants were Mārtikavata
Bhojas (14–16). From Andhaka Kāshya’s daughter obtained four sons,
namely Kukura, Bhajamāna, Shama and Kamvalavarhisha (17). Kukura’s son
was Dhrishnu and Drishnu’s son was Kapotaroma. His son again was Tittiri
(18). From him was born Punarvasu, whose son was Abhijit who had two
children (19). Both Ahuka (a son) and Ahuki (a daughter) were well-known
and the foremost of all celebrated persons. The following hymn was
chanted in Ahuka’s praise (20). "Encircled by his pure souled
descendants he (was noble and energetic) like a young horse". When that
king first went out on his excursion he was protected by the gods⁶⁹
(21). There was none amongst those who followed this Bhoja king who had
no issue, who had not made away a hundred presents, who had not a life
extending over a thousand years, who was not of pure deeds and who did
not perform Yajnas (22). At the command of Ahuka ten thousand cars with
ten thousand elephants, having yokes, pieces of wood at their bottom,
flags attached to them, with sounds like the muttering of clouds and
golden and silver chains, used to proceed to the eastern quarter
(23–24). An equal number of cars and elephants was placed in the
northern quarter. Having brought under subjection all his commanders
Ashuka used to go about with his kinsmen in his car adorned with a
gridle of small bells (25). The Andhakas conferred on Avanti king
Ahuka’s sister Ahuki. Ahuka begat two sons on the daughter of the king
of Kāshi (26). They were Devaka and Ugrasena who were both like the sons
of celestials. Devaka had four god-like sons (27). They were Devavān,
Upadeva, Sudeva, and Devarakshit. He had seven daughters of all whom he
conferred on Vasudeva (28). They were Devaki, Shāntideva, Sridevā,
Devarakshita, Vrikadevi, Upadevi and Sunāmni was the seventh (29).
Ugrasena had nine sons of whom Kangsa was the eldest. Others were
Nyagrodha, Sunāmā, Kanka, Shambhu, Subhamija, Rāshtrapāla, Sudhanu,
Anadhrishti and Pushtiman. They had five sisters, namely, Kāngsā,
Kangsavati, Sutanu, Rāshtrapāli, and the beautiful Kangkā. I have
described the family of Ugrasena, born in the Kuru race (30–31).
Meditating on this highly energetic Kuru race, a man, having offspring,
gets a big family (32).

⁶⁹ There is another meaning of this text. He used to go out on a
 conveyance drawn by eighty men. _Ashiti_ means eighty. _Charma_
 means a wooden conveyance and _Yukta_ means seated. The meaning
 that we have adopted is thus made out. _Ashitayas_ means gods,
 _Charma_ leathern protector of arrows; _Yukta_ protected _i.e._ he
 was protected by the gods as arrows are protected by leathern
 cases _i.e._ the gods were like leathern cases to him. Both the
 meanings are equally good. The former gives an idea of his
 splendour. The latter shows that he was in the good grace of the
 celestials.