TITLE: BRAHMADATTA RETIRES FROM THE WORLD

Markandeya said:—One of (those ganders) Vaibhrāja, an ascetic and
anchorite as he was, was born as the son of Brahmadatta by name
Viswaksena (1). Once on a time Brahmadatta was sporting delightedly in a
forest in the company of his wife like Indra in the company of Sachi
(2). Thereupon the king heard the noise made by an ant who was
soliciting a female-ant and displaying his displeasure (3). Hearing that
the poor female ant was expressing her disgust at the request of her
husband Brahmadatta laughed aloud (4). Thereat his wife Saunati was
stricken with sorrow and shame. That beautiful damsel had been
abstaining from food for a long time (5). When her husband attempted to
please her, that one of pure smiles said "O king, while you laughed at
me I do not like to live" (6). The king however communicated to her the
cause of his laughter but she placed no confidence in his words but
rather said in anger "This is not within the power of a man (7). What
man can decipher the sound of an ant save by the favour of the
Providence or by the good deeds of his pristine birth (8)? O king, if by
virtue of _Tapas_ or any other knowledge you have acquired the power of
understanding the sound of animals, then by some means create confidence
in me by which I may know it. Otherwise, O king, I shall renounce my
life. I do swear truly" (9-10).

Hearing those harsh words of the queen the highly illustrious king
Brahmadatta was greatly distressed. He then reverentially sought the
protection of the Omnipotent Nārāyana, the lord of all the worlds.
Having controlled his senses and abstaining from food the highly
illustrious king, within six nights, saw the Omnipotent Deity Nārāyana.
The Lord, compassionate unto all creatures, said to him (11-13). "O
Brahmadatta, after the night has passed away you will attain to
well-being." Having said this the lord disappeared there from (#4).
Having learnt a Sloka from his sons the father, of those four
high-souled Brāhmanas, considered himself blessed (15). He then desired
to go to the King and his Minister. Going there, he however found no
opportunity of reciting the sloka to them (16).

Thereupon having bathed in the tank and obtained the boon from Nārāyana,
he, delightedly ascending a golden chariot, entered the city (17).
Kandarikā, the foremost of the twice-born, acted as his charioteer and
Pānchala held the chowries (18). Considering that to be a favourable
moment the Brāhmana recited the sloka before the King and the two
ministers (19).

"Having been born as seven hunters in the Province of Dashārna they
were, in their next birth, born as deer on the Kalanjara mountain,—and
then they were born as Chakravākas in the island of Shara. Then they
were born as ganders in the Mānasa lake. And at last they were born in
Kurukshetra as Brāhmanas well read in the Vedas. Amongst them the four,
that where born of a good family, have gone to a distant region. You,
deviating from the path of Yoga, are sinking" (20–21). O descendant of
Bharata, hearing this the king Brahmadatta was stupified, and the reins
of the horses and chowries slipped off respectively from the hands of
Kandarika and Pānchāla. Seeing this the citizens and friends were all
greatly agitated (22–23). Having waited for a moment with his two
ministers on the car the king, after regaining his consciousness,
returned to the palace (24).

Thereupon recollecting the tank mentioned and regaining the Yoga power
practised in the previous birth he honored the Brāhmana with various
enjoyable things and chariots (25). Then placing on the throne his son
Viswaksena, the subduer of enemies, Brahmadatta retired to a forest with
his wife (26). After the king had gone to the forest for practising Yoga
Devala’s daughter, the good-natured Sunnati said with great delight to
the king (27):—"O monarch, you can understand the sound of the ants and
still you are addicted to sexual desires; therefore in great anger I
wanted to work you up (28). From this birth we must attain to the most
excellent state. You had deviated from the practice of Yoga and
accordingly I reminded you of it" (29). Hearing the words of his wife
the king was highly pleased. And having acquired Yoga power he attained
to a state which it is very difficult to obtain (30). Having purified
himself by his own actions and acquired the most excellent Sankhya Yoga
he attained to a consummate state (31). Having instituted only Sikshā
and laid down the order of the Vedas the great ascetic Pānchālya
acquired renown and the status of a Yoga preceptor (32). O son of Gangā,
all this happened in the days of yore before my very eyes. Meditate on
this and you will meet with well-being (23). Others also, who will
meditate on this most excellent account, will never be visited by
inferior births (34). O descendant of Bharata, listening to this highly
momentous history, one has his mind always bent on practising Yoga (35).
He, who will meditate on this, shall always enjoy peace and gradually
attain to the pure state of a Yogin which it is difficult to acquire in
this world (36). Vaishampāyana said:—In order to propagate the practice
of Yoga the intelligent Mārkandeya thus spoke in the days of yore by way
of describing the fruits of a Srāddha (37). The Divine Soma confers
nourishment on all creatures. Therefore hear from me an account of the
lunar family while describing the family of Vrishnis (38).