TITLE: MARRIAGE OF RUKSHMAVATI

Vaishampāyana said:—After a few days the powerful Rukshmi, the slayer of
his enemies, announced that his daughter would make her choice of a
husband (1). For this invited by Rukshmi many rich and powerful kings
and princes came to his house from various countries (2). Prādyumna,
accompanied by other princes, went there. As soon as she saw him
Rukshmini’s daughter wanted to marry him. She too, endued with grace and
effulgence, was celebrated on earth for her beauty. Keshava’s son
therefore wished to espouse that one of fair eyes (3-4). Thereupon when
all the powerful kings took their seats in the Swayamvara hall, the
Bidarbha king’s daughter chose Pradyumna the slayer of enemies (for her
husband) (5). For he was a master of arms and well-built like a lion.
Besides Keshava’s son was peerless in beauty on earth (6). And that
beautiful, youthful and accomplished princess too was attached to him
like unto Nārāyanas’s wife Indra-senā (7). After the termination of the
Swayamvara the kings repaired to their respective cities and Pradyumna
too went to Dwārakā with the princess of Bidarbha with him (8). The hero
lived happily in her company as did Nala in that of Damayanti. Pradyumna
begat on her a son by name Aniruddha, like unto the son of a god and of
matchless deeds on earth. When, Aniruddha, coming of age, mastered the
Vedas, the science of archery and the moral laws, Mādhava selected the
beautiful gold-like Rukshmavati, the grand-daughter of Rukshmi, for his
wife (9–11). O Janamejaya, the highly illustrious and intelligent king
Rukshmi used always to show rivalry with Krishna; still, on account of
the eagerness of his son and Rukshmini he cast off his enmity and said
with delightedness "I confer Rukshmavati on Aniruddha endued with
accomplishments and of a peaceful nature (12–13)." On this occasion
Keshava, surrounded by his own army and accompanied by Rukshmini,
Sangkarshana, his own sons and other Yādavas, went to Bidarbha (14).
Rukshmi’s kinsmen, friends and allies came there also at his invitation
(15), O king, thereupon, in an auspicious day and under the auspicies of
a favourable planet Aniruddha’s wedding was celebrated with great
festivity. Thus when Aniruddha was married to the Bidarbha princess, the
Baidharvas and the Yadavas performed a great festivity. And adored there
like immortals the Vrishnis lived happily.

Thereupon the liberal king of Ashmaka, Venudāri, Rukshma’s son
Shrutarvā, Chānura, Krātha, Angshuman, the highly powerful king of
Kalinga, Jayatsena, the king Pārdya and the beautiful king of Rishka,
all these highly rich chiefs of Deccan spoke secretly to the powerful
Rukshmi:—"You are an expert in dice and we too wish to play; Rāma is a
novice. Therefore following you we wish to defeat Rāma". Thus accosted
the mighty car-warrior Rukshmi approved of (their proposal). Thereupon
they all delightedly entered into a beautiful hall with golden pillars
and its floor covered with flowers. And it was sprinkled with sandal
water. Those kings, decorated with beautiful garlands and unguents, and
desirous of scoring victory, entered into that hall and sat upon golden
seats (16–24). Invited by those deceitful kings expert in the game of
dice, Rāma gladly said:—"See I am sporting" (25). In order to vanquish
Revati’s husband with a deceitful play the Deecan chiefs brought to the
place of gambling innumerable jems, pearls and gold coins (26).

Thereupon there commenced the game of dice, the object of dreadful
quarrels, a source of ruin to the wicked-minded and foe to friendship
(27). In that game of dice with Rukshmi, Baladeva betted from ten to a
thousand gold coins (28). Although the highly powerful Baladeva was very
careful Rukshmi won that game and betted another such amount (29). Thus
repeatedly defeated by Rukshmi the highly powerful elder brother of
Keshava betted one _koti_ gold coins (30). Saying to the holder of mace,
’you are defeated’ and smiling the greatly wily Rukshmi threw his dice.
And with pride he again said "Although unconquerable in battle,
Baladeva, a novice and weak in a game of dice, has lost innumerable gold
coins to me" (31–32).

Hearing it the king of Kalinga, delightedly and showing his teeth,
laughed aloud. Hearing those words of Rukshmi relating to his defeat the
holder of ploughshare (Bala) was worked up with anger. Assailed by the
cutting words of Bhishmaka’s son, the pious son of Rohini, although a
master of anger, again invoked his rage. And although worked up with
ire, the highly powerful Rama, controlling his passions, calmly
said:—"My next bet is one hundred _koti_ gold coins, O king. Throwing
red and copper coloured dice in this sinful country take all this"
(33–37). Thus addressed by Rohini’s son, Rukshmi, the wretch of a man,
did not say anything at first, then saying "Very well" he again threw
his dice (38). When the dice, bearing four marks, were thrown by him
Rukshmi was rightly defeated by Rāma. But the descendant of Bhoja did
not admit it but smilingly said "I have won the game." Hearing those
deceiptful words Baladeva was again filled with anger and therefore did
not give any reply. Thereupon increasing the anger of the high-souled
Baladeva an invisible voice said solemnly like the muttering of
clouds—"Truly has said the beautiful Baladeva. Rukshmi has been defeated
in a fair play. Although they know at heart that they have been defeated
still they do not admit it in words. Though Baladeva says nothing, still
in fact, he has won the game. This is the truth (39–44)."

Hearing this well-expressed truthful word from the sky the powerful
Sangkarshena stood up and began to grind on earth, Rukshmi’s elder
brother with the huge dice board. Enraged at those words, Rāma, the
foremost of Yadus, slew with force that harsh-speeched and jealous
Rukshmi (45–46). Thereupon coming out therefrom in anger he struck down
the teeth of the Kalinga king and began to roar there in anger like a
lion. Then taking up a dagger he terrified all other kings. Afterwards
uprooting, like an elephant, the golden pillars of the hall and
terrifying the Kaishikas there Sangkarshana, the foremost of the strong,
came out of the door (47-49). As a lion assails the little deer so
having slain the wicked Rukshmi, Rāma, the foremost of Yadus, encircled
by his own men, returned to his tent and communicated to Keshava all
that had happened (50-51). The highly effulgent Krishna said nothing to
Rāma. Hearing of the death of her own brother and cursing her own self
Rukshmini began to shed tears in anger and said:—"Alas, Rukshmi,
powerful like Indra, the slayer of hostile heroes who had not been slain
by Vāsudeva before, has been slain in the gambling-hall with the dice
board hurled by Rāma." (52-54).

On the highly powerful son of Bhishmaka, Rukshmi, trained by Bhārgava,
and well-versed in warfare and active like Bhārgava himself, being slain
the Vrishnis and Andhakas were filled with sorrow. O foremost of
Bharatas, you have thus listened to how the Vrishnis became enemies, of
Rukshmi and how he was slain. O king, a few days after this incident the
Vrishnis, who were under Rāma and Krishna, came to the city of Dwāravati
with profuse _riches_ (55–58).