TITLE: THE ORIGIN OF PITRIS AND FRUITS OF SRADDHAS

Janamejaya said:—How did the illustrious Aditya become the (presiding)
deity of Srāddhas? What is the most excellent mode of performing them? I
wish to hear all this, O Vipra. (1). What is the origin of the Pitris
and who are they? We have heard from the conversation of the Brāhmanas
that the Pitris (ancestral manes), stationed in heaven, are even the
gods of the gods. This is said by those well read in the Vedas. I
therefore wish to know this (2-3). I wish to hear of the most excellent
creation of Pitris, their various orders, their great strength, how are
they propitiated by the Srāddhas performed by us, and how they,
delighted, shower benedictions on us (4-5).

Vaishampāyana said:—I will now describe to you the most excellent
creation of the Pitris; how they are propitiated by Srāddhas performed
by us and how they, being pleased, pour blessings on us. Mārkandeya
described this when he was accosted by Bhishma. The question, that you
have asked me, was put to Bhishma by the pious king (Yudhisthira) when
the former was lying on the bed of arrows (5-9).

Yudhisthira said:—O you conversant with virtue, how people, seeking
nourishment, get it? By doing what do they not grieve I wish to hear
this (9).

Bhishma said:—O Yudhishthira, he, who propitiates the departed manes by
the performance of Srāddhas that secure all desired for objects, who
always performs them with a concentrated mind, attains to delight both
in this world and in the next. The Pitris confer virtue on him who seeks
it, children on him who wants them and nourishment on him who desires
for it (10–11).

Yudhisthira said:—The departed manes of some persons live in heaven, and
those of others live in hell. The fruits of Karma, it is said, eternally
exist with people. Persons, in expectation of fruits, perform Srāddhas
for their father, grand-father, and great-grand-father. How those
offerings reach the ancestral manes (12–14)? How can they, while living
in hell, grant them the fruits (thereof)? Who are those ancestral manes
Who else are others? To whom do we offer our offerings (15)? We have
heard that even the gods, in the celestial region, dedicate offerings to
the ancestral manes. I wish to hear all this at length O you of great
effulgence (16). You are endued with immeasurable intelligence, do you
describe to me, how by making gifts to the ancestral manes we are
released (from worldly trammels) (17).

Bhishma said:—O slayer of foes, I shall describe to you what I have
heard on this subject from my deceased father—who are those ancestral
manes and who are others to whom we dedicate our offerings (18). When on
the occasion of my father’s Srāddha I was about to offer him Pinda²⁶ my
father, rending assunder the earth, begged it of me with his hand (19).
His arm was adorned with bracelet and other ornaments—his fingers and
palm were as red as I had seen them before (20). Thinking that no such
practice is seen in Kalpa²⁷ I offered the Pinda at the Kusa grass,
without any consideration (21). O sinless one, then my father
delightedly said to me in sweet accents:—"O foremost of Bharatas, I have
been blessed with a son like you, both in this world and the next-a good
son, pious and learned as you are (22-23). You are also of firm vows, O
sinless one; with a view to lay down the religious practices of people,
I issued this command (24). As a man, observing the religious practices,
is entitled to a fourth part of the virtue thereof, so a stupid person,
transgressing them, is visited by one fourth of the sin (consequent
thereon) (25). The subjects follow the example set by the king in
religious practices (26). O foremost of Bharatas, you have observed the
practices laid down in the eternal Vedas and incomparable is my
satisfaction therefore (27). Greatly pleased with you I will confer upon
you a most excellent boon—do you pray for it which it is hard to get in
the three worlds (28). As long as you will wish to live Death will not
be able to extend his influence on you. When you will permit him he will
overpower you then only (29). O foremost of Bharatas, if there is any
other boon which you wish to pray for, tell me and I shall grant it
(30)."

On (my father) saying this, I, saluting him with folded hands, said "O
most exalted person, with your being propitiated I have achieved all my
objects (31). O you of great effulgence, if I am again entitled to a
favour, I wish to put a question which I desire you to answer yourself
(32)." My virtuous-souled father then said to me "O Bhishma, tell me
whatever you like. O Bhārata, I will remove your doubt about what you
will ask me" (35). Filled with curiosity I asked my father who had
repaired to the region of the performers of good deeds and who then
disappeared from that place (34).

Bhishma said:—"I have heard that the ancestral manes are the gods of the
gods. Are they the gods or they are others to whom we offer our
adoration (35)? How the _Pindas_ offered at Srāddhas propitiate the
Pitris who have gone to the other world? What are the fruits of a
Srāddha (36)? To whom the people, accompanied by the gods, Dānavas,
Yākshas, Rākshasas, Gandharvas, Kinnaras and huge serpents, dedicate
their offerings (37)? O you conversant with virtue, I consider you as
omniscient—I have grave doubts in this and great is my curiosity—do you
explain it to me." Hearing these words of Bhishma his father said (38).

Shantanu said:—Hear, O sinless descendant of Bharata, I will describe in
brief the origin of the Pitris and the fruits of Srāddhas. Do you hear
with a concentrated mind the object of performing Srāddhas for the
Pitris. The sons of the Prime Deity are known in heaven as Pitris
(39–40). The gods, Asuras, men, Yakshas, Rakshasas, Gandharvas, Kinnaras
and huge serpents, dedicate offerings to them (41). Propitiated by
Srāddhas they please the world with the gods and the Gandharvas—such is
the command of Brahmā (42). Therefore, "O great one, worship them with
excellent Srāddhas. They grant all desired-for objects and they will
encompass your well-being (43). When you will worship them by reciting
their names and families, we also, O Bharata, will be welcomed by them
in heaven (44). Markandeya will explain to you the remaining portion. O
descendant of Bharata, this ascetic, devoted to his father and having a
knowledge of atman, is present to-day at the Srāddha for extending his
favour unto me. Ask him, O great one, about this." Saying this he
disappeared (45–46).

²⁶ An oblation to deceased ancestors as a ball or lump of meat or
 rice mixed up with milk curds, flowers etc and offered to the
 manes at the several _Sraddhas_ by the nearest surviving
 relations.

²⁷ One of the six _Vedangas_ and comprehending the description of
 religious rites. It is called _Kalpa Sutra_.