TITLE: THE FIGHT BETWEEN KRISHNA AND SHANKARA

Vaishampāyana said:—Thereupon riding quickly Vinatā’s son, those three
(heroes), stationed in the battle-field like three fire-gods, began to
fight there. Seated on Garuda’s back those highly powerful three heroes
assailed and dispersed the Dānava army with a downpour of arrows.
Assailed with the strokes of discus, plough-share and arrows the
irrepressible and huge Danava army were worked up with anger. As fire
increases in a room with dry fuels so the fire, engendered by Krishna’s
arrows, increased that fire burning like that of dissolution, and
consumed thousands of Dānavas in the battle-field (1-5).

Beholding his soldiers assailed and burnt with various arrows of
Krishna, and take to their heels Vāna came there and prevented them
saying "Born in the race of the Daityas why do ye, overwhelmed with fear
and displaying your weakness, fly away from the battle-field? Why do you
take to your heels leaving off your respective coats of mail, swords,
daggers, darts, leathern protectors and axes? Think of your birth and
living with Hara and then decide whether you should fly away. I now
stand before you." Although they heard the words given vent to by Vāna,
the Dānavas, beside themselves with fear, paid no heed to them and fled
away. Of the soldiers remaining there only the Pramathas stood firm and
desired to fight again (6-11).

Beholding his soldiers routed, Kumbhānda, Vāna’s powerful minister and
friend, said:—"O ye leading Dānavas, behold Shankara, Kārtikeya and Vāna
in the battle-field. Still, possessed by fear, why are you flying away
leaving your own armies? Give up hope of your lives and fight." Before
they heard those words of Kumbhānda, the Danavas stricken with the fear
of the fire of Krishna’s discus, fled away on all sides. Thereupon
beholding all the soldiers routed by Krishna, Siva, of incomparable
prowess, had his eyes reddened with anger. And in order to protect Vāna,
he stood on his lustrous car and prepared himself for fighting. Kumāra
too ascended a car burning like car. Powerful Rudra, ascending a car
drawn by lions and biting his hips, drove where Hari was (12–17). At
that time his car, as if devouring the sky, making a great sound and
drawn by lions, looked like the full-moon freed from clouds. Filled with
various ghosts making diverse sounds that car of the god of gods
proceeded towards the battle-field. Of those ghosts some had the faces
of lions, some those of tigers, some those of serpents, some those of
horses and some those of camels; they too, filled with fear, were
trembling. Amongst those highly powerful ghosts, some had the faces of
asses, some those of camels, some those of peacocks, Some those of
horses, some those of rams, and some those of cats. Some had the faces
of sheep, some put on bark, some had tufts of hairs on their heads, some
wore matted locks, some had hairs bound up, and some were naked. They
all blew conch-shells and bugles when they proceeded to the
battle-field. Of them some had beautified faces and were adorned with
celestial weapons and flowers. Some were dwarfish and some were
grim-visaged. Some put on lion and tiger skins. Some had faces covered
with blood, huge-teeth and were fond of flesh. They all stood encircling
Shankara the destroyer of great enemies in the battle-field and were
waiting there at ease. Beholding that car of the indefatigable Rudra.
Krishna, riding Garuda, proceeded to the battle-field. Then beholding
Hari proceed on Garuda discharging arrows, Hara, ever standing at the
head in a battle, struck him in anger with hundreds, of winged arrows.
Assailed with shafts by Hara, the grinder of enemies, Hari too, irate,
took up most excellent weapons given by Indra. Thereupon assailed by
Krishna and Rudra the earth shook and the elephants trembled raising
their heads. The mountains were covered with the water of streams; some
had their summits scattered on all sides. In that encounter between Hara
and Hari the quarters, sky and earth were as if all ablaze. Fire-brands
fell on earth from all sides and dreadful-looking jackals began to emit
inauspicious cries. With a great noise Indra began to send down showers
of blood and fire-brands covered the rear of Vāna’s army. The wind blew
high, and the luminous bodies and herbs, shorn of lustre, flew about in
the sky. At that time the Grandfather, knowing that Rudra, the destroyer
of Asuras, had entered upon a battle, came there encircled by the
celestials The Apsaras, Gandharvas, Yakshas, Vidyadharas, Siddhas, and
Chāranas, stationed in the sky, began to witness that encounter. Then
Vishnu discharged Indra’s weapon at Rudra (18–37). Burning it went up to
the car where Rudra was. The very next moment hundreds and thousands of
arrows dropped before Hara’s car. Seeing it and filled with anger Hara
discharged the highly dreadful fiery weapon. It appeared indeed highly
wonderful. At that time Krishna and the three other heroes were entirely
covered with arrows; and scorched with the fire of the weapon they were
so much emaciated that they were not visible. Thereat thinking that
Krishna had been slain by the fiery weapon the Asuras sent up a leonine
shout (36-41).

Thereupon patiently bearing those fiery weapons in the battle-field the
powerful Vāsudava, who was a master of every sort of weapon, took up
Vāruna weapon. When that Vāruna weapon was discharged by the high-souled
Vāsudeva the fire of the fiery weapon was extinguished. When that weapon
was baffled by Vāsudeva Bhava discharged four other weapons resembling
the fire of dissolution, namely Paishāca, Rākshasa, Roudra and Angirasa.
In order to baffle those weapons Vasudeva shot four arrows namely
Vāyavya, Sāvitrya, Vāsava and Mohana. Having thus counteracted those
four weapons with his four arrows Mādhava discharged his Vaishnava
weapon like unto Antaka (the destroyer) with his mouth wide open. When
the Vaishnava weapon was discharged all the Bhutas, Yakshas and Asuras
of Vāna’s host, unconscious and stricken with fear, fled on all sides.
Then beholding his army abounding in Pramathas thus routed the great
Asura Vāna speedily ran towards the battle-field. As the king of gods,
the wielder of thunderbolt, proceeds encircled by the celestials, so
Vāna went surrounded by the highly powerful and mighty car-warriors, the
Daityas holding dreadful arms (42-50).

Vaishampāyana said:—At that time with the recitation of names and
mantras the Brāhmanas performed benedictory ceremonies on Vanā’s behalf.
Bali’s son Vāna too, conferring on the Brāhmanas, auspicious cows,
raiments, fruits, flowers and gold coins, shone like the lord of riches.
The huge car of Vāna, painted with gold and adorned with a hundred moons
and a million of stars and numerous bells, shone there like fire or a
thousand suns. Assuming a dreadful form Vāna, holding a bow, got upon
the car brought by the Dānavas for fighting with those foremost of
Yadus. Afterwards as at the time of the universal dissolution the ocean,
abounding in waves increased by the wind, is agitated so that ocean, of
great force abounding in cars of the heroes, went on. O king, at that
time the Dānavas, holding bows, great car-warriors as they were, shone
there like mountains covered with forests; their very sight created
terror in all (51-56).