TITLE: ACCOUNT OF KALAYAVANA

Janamejaya said:—O reverend sir, I wish to listen at length to the
history of the high-souled and intelligent Vāsudeva, the foremost of
Yadus (1). O foremost of the twice-born, why did Janārddana, without
fighting, leave Mathura the only abode of Lakshmi (the goddess of
prosperity), the hump (the most elevated) of Central India, the very
summit of the earth, abounding in profuse corns, wealth and beautiful
houses, and consisting of many worshipful Aryans? How did Kālayavana
behave towards Krishna? Having obtained the watery fortress Dwarkā what
did the great Yogin of hard penances the mighty-armed Janārddana do
(2–5)? Whose son was Kālayavana and how powerful was he? Do thou
describe all this to me (6).

Vaishampāyana said:—The high-minded Gārgya was the preceptor of both the
Andhaka and Vrishni races. He always observed the vow of celibacy; and
although he had a wife he did not know her. While the eternal Gārgya,
who was a master of passions, was thus spending his days this
brother-in-law described him as impotent before the king (7-8). O king,
having been thus dishonored in the city of Ajitanjaya and giving up his
desire of being united with his wife out of anger for his
brother-in-law, Gārgya engaged in hard penances for obtaining a son. And
living on pounded iron for twelve years he worshipped Mahādeva, the
holder of trident. For this Rudra conferred on him a boon that he would
obtain an all powerful son who would be able to discomfit in battle the
descendants of the Vishni and Andhaka races (9–10).

The king of Yavanas had no son. Hearing of the boon of having a son
conferred upon Gārgya, the foremost of the twice-born by Mahādeva, the
king brought him over to his own kingdom. And having consoled him he
engaged the milk-women to attend him in their own settlement. Having
assumed the guise of a milk-woman, an Apsara, Gopāli by name, conceived
that dreadful and undecaying embryo through Gārgya (12-14). Thus by the
command of the holder of trident, Gārgya begat on the Apsara, assuming
the form of a woman and living by him like a wife, the highly powerful
hero Kālayavana. And he was brought up in the inner appartment, like his
son, of the king Yavanas who had no issue. O king, after the demise of
the lord of Yavanas Kalyavana became king. And being desirous of
fighting when he questioned the leading twice-born ones about his
antagonist Narada pointed out the heroes of the Vrishnu and Andhaka
races (15-17). Krishna, the powerful slayer of Madhu, took no notice of
Kālayavana, although he grew up in the midst of the Yavanas because he
had heard from Narada the story of his obtaining the boon (18). When the
king of Yavanas grew exceedingly powerful, Shaka, Tukhāra Darava,
Parava, Tangana, Khasha, Panhava and hundreds of Mlechcha kings, living
near Himavan, took shelter under him (19–20). Encircled by those Dasyu
kings resembling a swarm of locusts, assuming various dresses and
holding various weapons, the king of Yavanas set out for Mathura (21).
He agitated the surface of the earth with innumerable horses, elephants,
asses, camels and a huge army (22). The path of the sun was covered with
the dust raised by the soldiers. By the urine and excreta of the
soldiers a river was created (23). And because that river issued from
the excreta of the horses and camels it passed by the name of Aswasakrit
(24).

Hearing of the approach of this huge army Vāsudeva, the leader of the
Vrishnis and Andhakas, addressed his kinsmen, saying (25):—"Great is the
calamity that has befallen the descendants of the Vrishni and Andhaka
races. For this enemy is unslayable by us on account of the boon
conferred on him by the holder of the trident (26). I employed all other
means as conciliation etc. to win him over. But he wishes for battle
worked up with pride (27). ’I am to live here:’ this Nārada said to me;
I too tell you this (28). The emperor Jarāsandha is not forgiving
towards us; and the other kings too, assailed by the Vrishni discus and
on account of the distruction of Kansa, have been displeased with us and
sought refuge with the Magadha king. Under the protection of Jarāsandha
they want to obstruct us: and many kinsmen of the Yādavas have been
slain by them. What more we will never acquire prosperity if we live in
this city."

Saying this and desirous of retreating Keshava sent an envoy to the king
of Yavanas. In order to terrorize him (the king of Yavanas) the highly
intelligent Mādhava put a highly dreadful black serpent, resembling a
collection of collyrium, into a jar and sealed it up. He then sent it to
the king of Yavanas through his own emissary. O foremost of Bharatas,
having said "Krishna is like a deadly serpent" that emissary showed the
jar to Kālayavana. Thereupon understanding that the Yadavas had sent it
to terrorize him Kalayavana filled that jar with dreadful ants. Thereat
that serpent was eaten up by the innumerable ants having sharp beaks and
was reduced to ashes. Thereupon sealing up that jar, Kālayavana sent it
with a profuse description to Krishna (29–37). Observing his own
expedient baffled Vāsudeva soon left the city of Mathurā and went to
Dwarka (33). O king, after that in order to put an end to hostilities,
that highly illustrious and powerful hero, Vasudeva settled all the
heroes in Dwarkā and having consoled them, set out on foot for Mathurā
with only his own arm for his weapon (39-40). Kālayavana was pleased at
seeing him and confronted him with rage. The highly powerful Krishna too
attracted him of his own accord. In order to get hold of Govinda the
lord of Yavanas pursued him, but could not catch that Yogin (41-42).

On account of his being successful in the war between gods and demons
the former offered a boon to the highly powerful and illustrious king
Muchakunda, the son of Māndhāta who prayed for sleep. O king, because he
was tired in battle he repeatedly said:—"O gods, I will, with my eyes
burning in anger, consume him who will arouse me from my sleep" (43–45).
The deities along with their king said "So be it." Having been thus
ordered by the gods, that king, worn out with fatigue, first came to the
king of mountains. And then entering into a cave he was asleep till he
was seen by Krishna. Nārada communicated to Krishna the boon obtained by
Muchukunda and his power. And therefore when pursued by his Mlechcha
enemy he humbly entered into Muchukunda’s cave (46–49). In order to
avoid the look of the royal saint Keshava, the foremost of the
intelligent, sat near his head (55). Following Vāsudeva, the wicked
minded Yavana king entered into the cave and saw that king there. And
like an insect falling into fire he kicked that king with his foot for
his own destruction (51–52). With the touch of the foot the royal saint
Muchukunda awoke and was highly enraged on account of the break of his
sleep (53). Thereupon recollecting the boon that was conferred by Indra
he looked at the Yavana king with angry eyes. As soon as he was eyed,
the king of Yavanas was all ablaze (54). O king, as a lightning consumes
a dried tree so the fire, engendered by the energy of Muchukunda’s eyes,
in no time reduced Kālayavana to ashes (55). Having thus acquired
victory by virtue of his own intellect Vāsudeva went to the emperor
Muchukunda, who was engaged in sleep for a long time and addressed to
him the following most excellent words (56):—"O king, I have heard from
Nārada—that thou art asleep for a long time. Thou hast performed a great
work for me. May good betide thee. I depart" (57).

Beholding Vasudeva of short stature the king Muchukunda thought:—"I was
asleep for a long time and the cycle has been changed." Then the emperor
said to Govinda:—"Who are you? Why have you come here? Tell me if you
can, how long I was asleep?" (56-59)

Krishna said:—"There flourished a king in the Lunar dynasty, by name
Yayāti, son of Nahusha. Yadu was his eldest son. He had four other sons
Turvasu and others. O lord, know me, as Vāsudeva, the son of Vasudeva
born in Yadu’s family. For some work I had come to you (60–61). O king,
I have heard from Nārada that you fell asleep in the Treta Yuga: and now
the Kali has set in. Tell me, what more I can do for you presently (62).
O king, you have reduced him to ashes by virtue of the boon conferred on
you by the gods whom, fighting for a hundred years, I could not slay
(63)".

Vaishampāyana said:—Thus accosted by Krishna the king Muchukunda issued
out of the cave. And having accomplished his object the intelligent
Vāsudeva too followed him (64). Having come out from the mouth of the
cave he saw that the earth had been covered with men of short stature
and of limited energy, strength and prowess and that his kingdom had
been occupied by others (65). Having seen all this and resolved upon
practising hard penances the king dismissed Krishna and entered into
thickets of the Himalaya (66). Having carried on austerities there he
died and repaired to the celestial region acquired by his own good
actions (67). Having brought about the destruction of his own enemy
through this expedient, the pious-souled and intelligent Vāsudeva went
to his soldiers and set out with that army consisting of cars, elephants
and horses, who had their master slain (68–69). Having thus attained to
the consummate accomplishment of his object and conferred upon the king
Ugrasena that four-fold army Janārddana embellished the city of Dwarkā
with wealth acquired by him (70).