TITLE: AN ACCOUNT OF THE BIRTH OF THE MOON

Vaisampayana said:—O king, Soma’s father the Divine Rishi Atri was the
mind-begotten son of Brahmā when, in the days of yore, he grew desirous
of creating progeny (1). Atri, with all his sons, began to do good unto
all creatures, by his words, mind and action (2). That innocent, highly
effulgent and virtuous-souled Rishi, of firm vows, formerly pratised,
with his arms raised, the most excellent penance of silence for three
thousand celestial years. This we have heard (3–4).

O descendant of Bharata, when that Rishi, having controlled his senses,
began to practise penances steadfastly his person assumed the mild
lustre of the moon (5). This moon-like lustre, of the person of that one
of controlled senses, soon spread over the sky. Then from his eyes tears
began to trickle down and flood the ten quarters (6). Thereupon the ten
goddesses delightedly conceived in ten different ways. Though they all
did it unitedly they however could not keep it (7). Thereupon the
effulgent, all-protecting moon in the embryo fell down lighting up all
the quarters (8). When the quarters could not bear this conception any
more the embryo, along with them, fell down on earth (9). Beholding the
moon thus fallen Brahmā, the grand-father of all, got on his chariot for
doing good unto all people (10) That chariot was made of the Vedas; its
form was virtue and it carried Brahmā; thousands of _Mantra_ horses wore
yoked to it; this we have heard (11). When that great soul, the son of
Atri, came down on earth, all the deities and the seven mind-begotten
sons of Brahmā began to chant his glories (12). In the same way, O my
child, Angira’s sons and Bhrigu with his sons began to hymn his glories
with Rik and Yayush _Mantras_ (13). Having his glories thus chanted by
the Rishis the effulgent moon had his increasing lustre stationed in a
circular form in the sky. It fully lighted up the three worlds (14). In
his that most excellent chariot the highly illustrious moon
circumambulated, for twenty-one times, the world bounded by the sea
(15). His lustre, that melted down on earth on account of the motion of
his car, became plants that shone in their effulgence (16). O king,
those plants conduce to the nourishment of the gods, ancestral manes,
men, beasts, birds, reptiles and other creatures; the moon is thus the
nourisher of the universe (17). O great one, having acquired lustre
through his own deeds and the chanting of his glories by the Rishis the
divine moon carried on hard austerities for one thousand _Padma_ years
(18). The moon was the asylum of all those silvery goddesses in the
shape of water who upheld the universe. He became celebrated by his own
actions.

Thereupon, O Janamejaya, Brahmā, the foremost of those conversant with
the Vedas, conferred upon him the sovereignty over seeds, plants, the
Brāhmanas and water (20). After his installation on the throne, O
monarch, the lord of rays lighted up the three worlds with his rays
(21). Daksha had twenty-seven daughters of great vows. People knew them
as stars. Pracheta’s son Daksha conferred them all on him (22). Having
obtained that great kingdom the moon, the lord of ancestral manes, made
arrangements for a Rajsuya sacrifice in which ten million kine were
given away as presents (23). The divine Atri was the _Hota_⁵⁰ thereof,
Bhrigu _Adhvaryu_⁵¹ Hiranyagarbha, _Udgata_⁵² and Brahmā himself was
Brahma⁵³ (24). And the Divine Nārāyana, surrounded by Sanatkumār and
other Prime Rishis, became the member thereof (25). O descendant of
Bharata, we have heard that the Divine Soma conferred presents on the
leading Brāhmana saints and all other Rishis of the three worlds who had
assembled there (26). Sinivāli, Kuhu, Dyuti, Pushti, Prabhā, Vasu,
Dhriti, Kirti and Lakshmi, these nine goddesses attended upon him (27).
Having bathed after the termination of the Yagna the foremost of kings,
the moon, worshipped of all the gods and Rishis, began steadily to light
up the ten quarters (28). O my child, having been honored by the sages
and acquired prosperity which it is very difficult to obtain his mind
began to deviate from humility. And accordingly sullied by immorality he
lost all control over himself (29). Having disregarded Vrihaspati, the
son of Angiras, the moon by force carried away his illustrious wife Tārā
(30). And albeit solicited by the gods and Rishis he did not return her.
Vrihaspati, the the preceptor of the gods, was accordingly enraged with
him (31). Ushanā (Suka) began to protect his sides. The illustrious
deity Rudra was formerly a disciple of Vrihaspati’s father. Out of
reverence for him he (Rudra) protected his rear, taking his Ajagava bow
in his hands (32–33). A terrible battle, destructive of the gods and
demons on account of Tārā, was fought at the place where the high-souled
Siva discharged his mighty weapon Brahmasiras—for the destruction of the
demons and where their glory was (accordingly) destroyed (34–35).

O descendant of Bharata, in that battle the gods, well read in the
precepts of religion who had sided Vrishaspati, and the deities
Tushitas, who belonged to Soma’s party who had stolen away his
preceptor’s wife, sought refuge with the Prime Deity the Eternal Brahmā
(36). Thereupon the Grand-father himself came there, prevented Sukra and
Sankara (to fight) and gave back Tārā to Vrihaspati (37). Beholding Tārā
_enciente_ Vrihaspati said to her:—"You must not give birth to this
child at my house" (38). She then gave birth to a son, the destroyer of
robbers, effulgent like a burning flame, on a bundle of fibrous sticks
(39). As soon as he was born that beautiful boy overclouded the beauty
of the celestials. Filled with suspicion accordingly the deities
enquired of Tārā saying "Who is he? Tell us truly if he is Vrihaspati’s
son or Soma’s." When she was thus questioned by the gods she could give
no reply out of shame (40—41). Thereupon her son, the slayer of robbers,
was about to imprecate a curse on her. Preventing him Brahmā himself
asked Tārā for the solution of the doubt (42). "Tell us, O Tātā, what
the truth is. Whose son is he?" Thereupon with folded hands she said to
the Lord Brahmā, the conferrer of boons:—"(He is) Soma’s." Then his
father the Patriarch Soma smelt the crown of his high-souled son, the
destroyer of robbers (43–44). The intelligent (Soma) named his son
Budha. He always rises in the sky in a hostile direction (45) Budha
begat a son on Vairāja’s daughter Ilā. His son was the great king
Pururava (46). He begat on Urvashi seven high-souled sons. On account of
his arrogance the Moon was attacked with consumption (47). On account of
his thus being subject to this disease his orbit suffered decrease. He
then sought refuge with his father Atri (48). The great ascetic Atri
released him from his sins. And accordingly freed from consumption he
again shone in his effulgence (49). O monarch, I have thus described to
you, the account of the birth of the Moon enhancing glory. I shall now
describe his family (50). On hearing of the story of the birth of the
Moon ever giving blessedness, freedom from diseases, long life and
progeny one is freed from all his sins (51).

⁵⁰ A priest who at a sacrifice recites the prayers of the Rig-Veda.

⁵¹ A Brāhmana versed in the rituals of the Yayur-Veda.

⁵² A reciter of the prayers &c. of the Sama Veda.

⁵³ The Superintending or presiding priest of the sacrifice.