TITLE: AN ACCOUNT OF THE SEVEN BRAHMANAS

Markandeya said:—The people perform Srādha and even the Yogins do the
same. So I shall describe to you its most excellent fruit (1). O
descendant of Bharata, religious knowledge gradually evolved from what
Brahmadatta had obtained in his seventh birth (2). O you of great
intellect shorn of sins, hear what in the days of yore the Brāhmanas
obtained by performing Srādhas to the neglect of religion (3). O my son,
I saw with my celestial vision at the field of Kurukshetra the seven
impious Brāhmanas engaged in performing religious rites for ancestral
manes as pointed out by Sanatkumār (4). Vāgdustha, Krodhana, Hingsra,
Pishuna, Kavi, Khasrima and Pitrivarti—these seven Brāhmanas, by name
and action, were the sons of Koushika and the disciples of Garga. When
after imprecating a curse their father left the house, they, taking the
vow of celibacy, began to live in the house of Garga (5–6). Once on a
time at the command of their preceptor they all went to the forest to
tend the milch-cow Kapilā with its calf that had been obtained fairly
(7). O descendant of Bharata, being stricken with hunger on the way they
cherished the sinful desire of killing the cow (8). Kavi and Khasrima,
however, did not wish it then and they two could not prevent the other
Brāhmanas (9). Of these the Brāhmana Pitrivarti, who used to perform
daily Srādha and other evening rites and abide by virtuous ways, said in
anger to his brothers (10):—"If you are all bent upon slaying this cow
then we all, with our minds controlled, dedicate it to the ancestral
manes (11). By this, even this cow will acquire virtue no doubt. And if
we perform a pious rite for our ancestral manes we shall not commit an
iniquity (12)."

Thereupon, O descendant of Bharata, they all, having agreed to this,
killed the cow and having dedicated it to the ancestral manes, took its
meat (13). Having taken the meat of the cow they all said to their
preceptor:—"The cow has been killed by a tiger and here is her calf"
(14). Out of simplicity the Brāhmana took the calf. Having imposed on
their preceptor by a false story all those Brāhmanas, on the expiration
of their lease of life, met with death (15). On account of their that
sinful conduct towards their preceptor and for the destruction of the
cow, they, possessed by envy, ruthlessness and anger, were born as the
sons of a hunter. They were all strong and liberal-minded. On account of
their duly worshipping the ancestral manes and killing the cow they
carried with them the knowledge of their pristine birth and actions.
Those learned seven Brāhmanas were born as hunters in the province of
Dashārna (16-18). They were all intent upon performing their own duties,
were truthful and shorn of avarice. They used to work only for the time
that was necessary to keep their body and soul together (19). The rest
of the time they used to spend in meditation. Their names, O king, were
respectively Nirvaira, Nivirta, Kshanta, Nirmangu, Kriti, Vaighasa and
Mātrivarti. They were all very highly pious hunters (20–22). Thus living
and performing the duties of a hunter they worshipped and satisfied
their old parents (22). When in time their parents died, they, leaving
aside their bows and arrows, renounced their lives in the forest (23).
By those pious actions they, in the next birth, became deer carrying
with them the recollection of their pristine birth. Because they used to
strike terror and slay (the deer) they, filled with fear, were born in
the beautiful Kālanjara mountain as deer, named Unmakha, Nityavitrasta,
Stabdhakarna, Vilochana, Pandit, Ghasmar and Nādi (24–25). Recollecting
their former birth and species they used to roam in the forest. They
were all of subdued minds, peaceful, unmarried and used to perform good
works and observe the same religious rites. Adopting the life of a Yogin
they used to live there (26–27). Leading the life of ascetics and taking
a small quantity of food they gave up their lives in a desert. O king, O
descendant of Bharata, even now in the desert attached to the Kālanjāra
mountain their footsteps are seen (28). By those pious actions, O my
son, they were divested of all evils—and they were born in a more
auspicious species, namely that of Chakravākas (29). Leading a life of
celibacy those pious ascetics were born in the holy island of Shara as
seven water-fowls (30). Their names were Nispriha, Nirmama, Kshānta,
Nirdanda, Nisparigraha, Nivritti and Nivrita (31). Those pious
Chakravakas were all Brahmachārins. Abstaining from food and carrying on
hard austerities they died on the bank of a river (32). Those seven
brothers have become these ganders ranging at will. These are the seven
intelligent Brahmachārins carrying the recollection of their pristine
birth (33). Because born as Brāhmanas they, by false words, imposed on
their preceptor, they are now born as birds moving about in the world
(34). And because though for their selfish ends they worshipped their
ancestral manes they have obtained a knowledge of their previous birth
(35). These ganders are respectively named Sumanā, Suchivāk, Sudha,
Panchama, Chinnadarshana, Sunetra and Swatantra (36). Of them the fifth
came by the name of Pānchika in his seventh birth, the sixth by that of
Pandarika, and the seventh by that of Brahmadatta (37). On account of
the hard austerities performed by them in seven births, of the Yoga
practices carried on by them and of their good Karma they listened to
the recitation of the Vedic hymns in their first birth in the house of
their preceptor. In consequence thereof their inclination remained pure
though they lived in the world, (38–39). All these Brahmachārins had the
knowledge of Brahman; and having been engaged in meditation they lived
there (40). While all those birds were living together there, the highly
prosperous, all-powerful and the effulgent king Vibhrāja, the head of
Neepas, born in the race of Puru, along with the females of his house,
came to that forest (41–42). Beholding that prosperous king the bird
Swatantra was possessed by envy and wished to become so (43). (He
thought):—"If I have done any good deed and practised _Tapas_, forsooth
I shall become such a king. I have been greatly emaciated by
hard-austerities yielding no fruits nor happiness (44)."