TITLE: AN ACCOUNT OF AKRURA

Vaishampayana said:—Akrura had that peerless jewel which Krishna
conferred on Satrājit, stolen by Shatadhanwā (1). Akrura always wished
to have the beautiful Satyabhāmā.⁷⁰ As soon as he got an opportunity he
desired to possess that valuable jewel (2). Thereupon, having slain
Satrājit at the dead of night the highly powerful Shatadhanwā took away
the jewel and made a present of it to Akrura (3). Taking that jewel he
made Shatadhanwā promise that he would never give out that the jewel was
in his (Akrura’s) possession (4). (He said):—"If Krishna attacks you I
shall follow you. Forsooth the whole of Dwarkā is now under my control
(5)." On her father (Satrājit) being slain the illustrious Satyabhāmā,
stricken with grief, got on a chariot and repaired to the city of
Barawāvata (6). She then communicated to her husband what had been
perpetrated by Shatadhanwa of the Bhoja race. Then stricken with grief
and standing by his side she began shedding tears (7). Having performed
the watering ceremony of the Pāndavas burnt in the house of lac⁷¹
Krishna engaged Satwaki to perform their obsequial rites (8).

Thereupon hurrying on to the city of Dwarkā the graceful slayer of
Madhu⁷² said to his elder brother Haladhar⁷³ (9) "Prasena has been
killed by a lion and Satrājit has been slain by Shatadhanwā. Therefore I
am the master of the jewel Sywamantaka (10). Therefore speedily get on
your car, O mighty armed hero. After slaying the highly powerful Bhoja
Swyamataka will be ours (11)". Thereupon there arose a terrible
encounter between Krishna and Shatadhanwā The latter saw Akrura on all
sides (12). Thereupon beholding both Krishna and Shatadhanwā enraged
Akrura, though capable, out of wickedness did not help the son of
Hridika (13). Thereat stricken with fear Shatadhanwā took to his heels.
With one mare he travelled over a distance of more than a hundred
_Yojanas_⁷⁴ (14). O king, Shatadanwa, of the Bhoja race, had a mare that
could go over a distance of a hundred _Yojanas_, by name
_Vijnātāhridayā_. With her he fought with Krishna (15). Having travelled
over a distance of a hundred _Yojanas_ Shatadhanwa found her motionless
and seeing the increased motion of the car he left her off (16).
Thereupon, O descendant of Bharata, on account of the exhaustion and
misery of that mare all his vital breaths went up to the sky. Then
Krishna said to Rāma. (17). "Wait here, O you of large arms. I have seen
the wretched plight of the mare. Going on foot I shall carry away the
jewel Swyamantaka (18)". Thereupon, O king, going on foot, Achyuta
(Krishna), highly skilled in the use of arms, killed Shatadhanwa on the
way to Mithila (19). Having slain the highly powerful Bhoja king he did
not see Swyamantaka. And seeing Krishna return Balarāma said to him
"Give me the jewel" (20).

Krishna said:—"I have not got it." Thereat Rama was filled with anger.
Repeatedly exclaiming "Fie on you, Fie on you," he replied to Janarddana
(21). "I forgive you because you are my brother. May you farewell. I go
away. I have nothing to do with you or other Vrishnis of Dwarkā (22)."
Thereupon Rāma, the subduer of enemies, entered the city of Mithilā. He
was then honored with all becoming presents after his heart by the king
of Mithilā (23). In the interval the most intelligent Vabhru began to
collect various articles for the performance of sacrifices (24). The
highly illustrious son of Gāndini, on account of the jewel Swyamantaka,
entered into the initiation-like coat of mail⁷⁵ for protecting himself
(25). He devoted most excellent jewels and various other articles to the
performance of sacrifices for sixty thousand years (25). That sacrifice,
of the high-souled Akrura consisting of food and various presents, was
called the Akrura Yajna (27). Thereupon repairing to the city of Mithilā
the king Duryodhana received from Balabhadra the most excellent
instructions in the use of clubs (28). Thereupon propitiating Balarāma
all the mighty car warriors of the Vrishni race and the high-souled
Krishna brought him back to the city of Dwarkā (29). Then the foremost
of men Akrura, with Andhakas, left Dwarkā. Slaying the highly powerful
Satrājit in battle with all his friends Krishna, in feat of dissension
amongst his kinsmen, neglected him (Akrura). After the departure of
Akrura Pākashasana⁷⁶ did not pour rain (30–31). When the whole country
was devastated by draught the Kukuras and Andhakas began to propitiate
Akrura (32). When the liberal Akrura returned to Dwarkā the
thousand-eyed Indra began to discharge showers on the bank of the ocean
(33). O foremost of Kurus, in order to please Krishna the intelligent
Akrura gave him in marriage his sister Sushilā (34). Guessing by his
riches and liberality that Swyamantaka was with Akrura, Janarddana said
to him in the midst of an assembly "O lord, the jewel is in thy
possession. Do thou give it to me. O giver of honors; do not cheat me. O
sinless one, the anger, that possessed me sixty years before, is now
enkindled all on a sudden. A long time has elapsed. Give me the Jewel
therefore (35–37)."

Thereupon at the words of Krishna the high-minded Akrura, without
experiencing the least pain, gave him the jewel in the midst of the
assembled Sātwatas (38). Receiving from Akrura the jewel who gave it
away with all simplicity, Hari, the repressor of enemies, returned it to
him with a delighted heart (39). Obtaining the jewel from Krishna’s
hands and placing it on his breast, Akrura shone there like the sun
(40).

⁷⁰ The sentence is elliptical and requires a little elucidation.
 Akrura had in view of marrying Satyabhama. But when he found that
 she had been given away to Krishna he was mortified. He was then
 seeking for an opportunity of getting the jewel Swyamantaka.

⁷¹ This refers to an incident in the Mahabharata. Duryodhana
 treacherously invited the Pandavas to a house of lac constructed
 for that purpose and set fire to it. They, however, being informed
 of it beforehand, escaped. Duryodhana, however, thought that they
 had been consumed and Krishna, to keep up an appearance, was
 performing the obsequial rites. [_See Jatugrihadaha Parva_.]

⁷² The word in the text is Madhusudana, a name of Krishna. He was
 called so on account of his killing the demon king Madhu.

⁷³ A name of Balarama because he always used to carry a plough-share
 in battle.

⁷⁴ A measure of distance equal to four _Kroras_ which at 8,000 cubits
 or 4,000 yards to the _Krora_ or _Kos_ will be exactly nine miles;
 other computations make the _Yojana_ but about five miles, or even
 no more than four miles and a half.—Wilson.

⁷⁵ He initiated himself for the performance of sacrifices, for any
 one so doing is a proof against all misfortunes.

⁷⁶ A name of Indra, the god of rain. He obtained this appellation
 after slaying a demon by name Paka. The word literally means, "the
 chastiser of Paka."