TITLE: CHITRALEKHA UNITES ANIRUDDHA WITH USHA: ANIRUDDHA’S

FIGHT WITH VANA’S SOLDIERS.

Vaishampāyana said:—Having arrived at the city of Dwārakā and living
near the palace of Vāsudeva Chitrālekha began to think of the measures
by which she might know how Aniruddha had been to the city of Vanā.
While she was thus thinking she saw the ascetic Nārada engaged in
meditation in the water (1–2). Seeing him, Chitralekhā, having her eyes
expanded with joy, approached him. Having saluted him she stood before
him hanging her head down. Having blessed Chitralekhā Nārada said:—"I
wish to know truly why you have come here." Hearing it Chitralekha, with
folded hands, said to the celestial saint Nārada worshipped of the world
(3-5). "Listen to it, O Reverend Sir. I have come here as a messenger
for taking Aniruddha with me. Hear, O Muni, why I am to take him with
me. A great Asura, by name Vāna, lives in the city of Shonitapura. He
has a most beautiful daughter by name Ushā. She has been attached to
that best of men, Pradyumna’s son, for he has been selected by her as
her husband on account of the boon given by the goddess. I have come
here to take him with me. Do what leads to my success. O great Muni,
after I had taken Aniruddha to Shonitpura communicate the news to
Keshava having eyes like red lotuses for truly an encounter shall take
place between Krishna and Vāna. Highly powerful is the great Asura Vāna
in battle, so Aniruddha will not be able to defeat him. The large-armed
Keshava will vanquish that thousand-armed Asura. O reverend Sir, I have
come to you for finding out the means by which the lotus-eyed (Keshava)
may come to know of it. How shall I steal away Aniruddha and how may
Keshava learn the real truth? O Sir, if you are propitiated with me I
shall not have to fear Keshava. When angered the large armed Keshava can
consume even the three worlds: do that by which Keshava, stricken with
sorrow for his grand-son, may not consume me with a curse. You should, O
celestial saint, concert a measure by which Ushā may get her husband and
I may not have anything to fear (6-15)." Thus addressed by Chitralekhā
the divine Nārada said to her the following sweet words:—"I offer you
protection. Shorn of fear hear what I say. O you of sweet smiles, if any
encounter takes place when you steal away Aniruddha to the appartment of
maidens remember me. O beautiful lady, I am much fond of seeing battles
and I take great pleasure in them. Accept the Tāmasa learning which can
infatuate all the worlds and which I have mastered by practising hard
austerities." After the great saint Nārada had said this, Chitralekhā,
quick-coursing like mind, said "So be it." Thereupon having saluted the
high-souled Rishi Nārada she set out in the sky searching for
Aniruddha’s house (17–21).

Thereupon going to the centre of Dwaravati she saw the beautiful palace
of Kāma. Near it she saw Airuddha’s palace. It had golden altars and
pillars made of gold and sapphires. It was adorned with garlands and
jairs full of water. It had beautiful figures of peacocks on the turret
and had a rows of celestial buildings set with jems and corals and
filled with the music of the Gandharvas. Beholding the huge palace at
the centre of Dwārakā where Pradyumna’s son lived happily, Chitralekhā,
all on a sudden, saw Aniruddha there. She saw there Kāma’s son playing
in the midst of highly beautiful women as the moon shines amongst the
stars. Hundreds of women were attending on him. Seated like Kuvera on a
most excellent beautiful seat Aniruddha was drinking Mādhvika wine.
There were being sung sweet songs in accompaniment with time. But
Aniruddha’s mind was not attached thereto. Many accomplished ladies were
dancing there but Chitralekha did not see him pleased thereby. At that
time his mind was not much after pleasure and he was showing dislike
even for drinking. Thereupon thinking "Surely his mind is busy with the
dream," Chitralekhhā was shorn of anxiety (22–31).

Beholding Aniruddha like Indra’s standard in the midst of those
beautiful women the intelligent Chitralekhā thus revolved in her mind
"How shall I accomplish this work? How shall we meet with well-being?"
Beholding Aniruddha in the midst of the women in his palace, the
illustrious Chitralekhā, having beautiful eyes, thought:—"By my Tamasik
illusion I will overpower all except Aniruddha". Thereupon hiding
herself in the sky above the palace, she, in sweet words, said to Kāma’s
son:—"O hero! O descendant of Yadu, is it all well with you? Have you
spent well the day and evening? O large-armed son of Rati, hear, I have
something to communicate to you. I have come here to inform you
something of my friend Ushā. O hero, I have been sent to you by Ushā
whom you saw in a dream and married and who has been cherishing you at
her heart. O gentle one, that maiden is again and again weeping, yawning
and sighing for seeing you. O hero, she will live if you go there.
Forsooth, in your absence she will die. O descendant of Yadu, although
thousands of women are reigning in your heart still you should hold her
by the hand who cherishes you at heart. Besides while conferring on her
a boon the goddess pointed to you as her becoming husband. I have given
her your portrait and she has kept it on her bosom. Keeping that
portrait on her person she is surviving with the hope of seeing you. O
foremost of Yadus, kindly satisfy her desire. O descendant of Yadu,
myself and Ushā bow to you with bent heads. O hero, hear, I will
describe now her birth, family, character, nature, and the history of
her father. The daughter of the heroic Asura king Vāna, the grand-son of
Virochana who lives in the city of Shonita, seeks your hand. Her mind is
devoted to you and her life depends on you. Forsooth the goddess has
selected her as your becoming husband. O Kāma’s son, that beautiful
maiden is living with the hope of being united with you (32–47)."

Hearing the words of Chitralekhā Aniruddha said:—"O beautiful lady, hear
how I saw her in a dream. I am day and night beside myself with thinking
of her beauty, weeping and other movements. O Chitralekhā, I wish to see
my love. Therefore if I am worthy of your favour and if you wish to make
friends with me take me there." The Apsarā Chitralekhā delightedly said
"Accomplished is today what my friend wanted (48-52)."

Vaishampāyana said:—Informed of Aniruddha’s desire the intelligent
Chitralekhā said "So be it" (48–53). Crossing the road frequented by
Siddhas and Chāranas Chitralekhā, all on a sudden, entered into the city
of Shonitpura. By virtue of her illusory powers the great Chitralekhā,
capable of assuming forms at will, invisibly arrived where Ushā was, and
she then brought and showed to Ushā the heroic Aniruddha, beautiful like
Kandarpa, clad in a beautiful raiment and adorned with various ornaments
(54–57). Thereupon beholding him in the palace by her friend Ushā was
filled with surprise and conducted him to her room. Having her eyes
expanded with joy on seeing her lover Ushā, with Arghya, worshipped the
Yadu prince in her own room. Thereupon welcoming Chitralekhā with sweet
words, the maiden, in fear, quickly said to her:—"O you clever in work,
how will this work be accomplished secretly? Everything will be well if
it is finished privately. If it gets wind however our life will be in
danger." Hearing it Chitralekhā said:—"O friend, hear what I have to say
in this matter. The Providence destroys even manliness. By the favour of
the goddess every thing will turn out in your favour. Besides if we
carefully and secretly finish this work no body will be able to know
it." Thus addressed by her friend she was consoled and said "So be it."
Afterwards she said to Aniruddha—"By my good luck, that lucky person has
been seen by me, who acted like a thief in a dream, and seeking whom as
a lover, difficult to be found, I was stricken with sorrow. O hero, the
heart of women is really tender and therefore I ask you ’Is everything
well?’" (58–67).

Hearing those sensible and sweet words of Ushā, Aniruddha, the foremost
of Yadus, replied in still sweeter words. Wiping the tears off the eyes
of Vāna’s daughter he smilingly said in words attracting her mind:—"O
goddess, O fair one, O you of sweet words, I give you a happy tidings.
Everything is well with me every where by your favour. O fair one, I had
never seen this place before. Only once in a dream I came to this city
of maidens. O timid girl, the words of Rudra’s consort can never be
untrue, and therefore by your favour I have come to this place. Thinking
that the goddess will be pleased and you will be satisfied, I have come
here and sought your protection. Be you pleased" (63–73). Thus addressed
by her lover, Ushā, adorned with beautiful ornaments, conducted him to a
private room and waited there as if stricken with great fear. Thereupon
united in nuptials according to Gandharva rites they spent the day like
a pair of Chakravākas. United with her husband, Aniruddha, the beautiful
Ushā, adorned with celestial garlands and unguents, attained to an
excess of joy (74–76). Although she lived happily with Aniruddha nobody
could know it. But a few days after Vāna’s guards came to know that Ushā
was living with Aniruddha the foremost of Yadus adorned with celestial
garlands and raiments and pasted with celestial unguents. Afterwards
they speedily communicated to Vāna the conduct of his daughter which
they had seen (77-79).

Hearing it the heroic son of Bali, Vāna, the slayer of his enemies,
ordered his servant soldiers to kill Aniruddha. He said:—"Do you all
soon proceed and kill that sinful, wicked wretch who has sullied the
character of our family. Alas, Ushā being ravished our great family has
been contaminated. Alas, what is the strength, patience and pride of
that stupid person who has entered into my city and palace and has
ravished my daughter by force though I did not give her away." Saying
this Vāna again urged on his soldiers. They issued out, obeying his
command and putting on their coats of mail. In great anger those highly
dreadful and powerful Dānavas, taking up various weapons, came speedily
where Aniruddha was in order to kill him (80–85).

Hearing the uproar of that approaching army the heroic son of Pradyumna
said "What is this?" and rose up all on a sudden. Thereupon he saw that
the soldiers, taking up various weapons, stood encircling that big
house. Beholding that army, the illustrious daughter of Vāna began to
weep fearing the death of Aniruddha. Her eves were filled with tears.
Then beholding the deer-eyed Ushā cry piteously "Oh my husband! Oh my
husband!" and tremble. Aniruddha said:—"May your fear disappear. O you
of a beautiful waist, you need not fear as long as I am here. O
illustrious lady, you have not the least ground for fear. Rather the
time of your joy has arrived. If the entire collection of Vāna’s
servants arrives here I am not the least anxious. Witness my power
to-day, O timid girl" (86–89). Hearing the uproar of the soldiers
Pradyumna’s son rose up all on a sudden and said "What is this?" (90)
Thereupon he saw the soldiers encircling with various weapons all sides
of that big palace (91). Saying this and taking up his arms Aniruddha,
biting his lips in anger, speedily went where the soldiers were (92).
Thereupon understanding that an encounter would soon take place with the
followers of Vāna Chitralekhā thought of the god-like Rishi Nārada (93).
Recollected by Chitralekhā that foremost of Munis, within a moment,
arrived at the city named Shonita (94). Stationed in the sky he said to
Aniruddha:—"Do not fear, O hero, I have come to this city" (95).
Thereupon beholding Nārada and saluting him the highly powerful
Aniruddha grew delighted and made himself ready for the battle (96).
Thereupon hearing the uproar of the soldiers he, all on a sudden, rose
up like an elephant goaded with a pike (97). Beholding that large-armed
hero come down from the palace biting his lips they fled away stricken
with fear (98). Seeing it Pradyumna’s son, expert in various forms of
war-fare, took up a Parigha, lying at the door of the inner appartment
and hurled it at them (99). Those soldiers, masters of fighting, struck
Aniruddha with a downpour of clubs, maces, swords, darts and arrows
(100). Although completely wounded with Nārachas and Parighas by those
expert Dānavas Pradyumna, roaring like an evening cloud, was not
over-powered (101). As the sun ranges in the midst of clouds in the sky,
so he, taking up a dreadful Parigha, stood in their midst (102). Seeing
it Nārada, carrying a staff and a black antelope skin, delightedly said
to Aniruddha "Well-done! Well-done!" (103) Thus assailed with the
dreadful Parigha by Pradyumna of incomparable power, the soldiers fled
away like clouds dispersed by the wind (104). Having driven with Parigha
the Dānavas from the battle-field the highly powerful hero Aniruddha
delightedly set up a leonine shout as the clouds mutter in the sky after
the termination of the rainy season (105). Saying to the Dānavas,
dreadful in battle "Wait, wait"! Pradyumna’s son, the slayer of his
enemies, began to smile. Thus assailed by that high-souled hero in
battle they, flying from the battle-field and stricken with fear, went
where Vāna was. And even going near Vāna, those Danāvas, bathed in blood
and having their eyes dilated with fear, could not enjoy peace. They
began to sigh heavily again and again; they were urged on by Vanā saying
"No fear! No fear! O ye leading Danavas, casting off fear, do ye fight
again." Vāna again said to them who had their eyes dilated with
fear:—(106-110). "Throwing off your glory well known in three worlds,
why are you bewildered like eunuchs (111)? Who is he, of whom you are so
much afraid, you who are born in well known families and who are clever
in fighting? (112). You need not help me to today. Avaunt, quit my
sight" (113). Censuring them thus with very many harsh words the
powerful Vāna ordered millions of other soldiers to proceed to the
battle-field, (114). He then appointed Rudar’s army consisting of many
Pramathas with various weapons in vanquishing Aniruddha (115). Thereupon
the entire firmament was covered with Vāna’s soldiers having burning
eyes and resembling clouds surcharged with lightning (116). Some of them
stood on the surface of the earth roaring like elephants and some
appeared like clouds of the rainy season (117). Thereupon when that huge
army again assembled there were heard on all sides cries of "Wait!
Wait!" (118). The hero Aniruddha ran towards them. It was really a
wonder, O king, that he fought then single-handed with many (119).
Engaged in the encounter with the highly powerful Dānavas he snatched
away their Parighas and Tomaras and killed them with them. Taking up his
most excellent Parigha again and again in the battle-field the highly
powerful Aniruddha killed the Daityas endued with great power (120-121).
At that time Kāma’s son, the slayer of his enemies, taking up his
Nistringsha and leathern protector, was seen moving about in twelve
ways. Thus when he moved about in the battle-field in a thousand
different ways the enemies saw him as the playing Death with thousands
of mouth wide open.

Thereupon again assailed by Aniruddha the Asuras, bathed in blood, again
fled away from the battle-field and went where Vāna was. Crying
plaintively those highly powerful Asuras fled away on all sides riding
elephants, horses and cars. At that time the Dānavas, who had fled from
the battle-field, were so much overwhelmed with sorrow and fear that one
fell upon the other and they all vomitted blood. While fighting with
Aniruddha the Dānavas experienced such a fear as they had not even while
fighting with the gods in the days of yore. Some vomitted blood and some
fell down on earth amongst those Danavas, resembling mountain summits
who had clubs, maces and swords in their hands. Leaving behind Vāna in
the battle-field those vanquished Danavas fled away in fear to the
welkin. Beholding his army thus routed to a man Vāna was inflamed with
ire like unto sacrificial fire when fuels are put to it. Ranging all
over the welkin, Nārada, pleased with seeing Aniruddha’s fight, began to
dance exclaiming "Well-done! Well-done!"

In the meantime, powerful Vāna, worked up with anger, ascending the car,
brought by Kumbhānda, drove with uplifting sword where Aniruddha was. As
Sakra shines with his thousand standards so that Asura appeared
beautiful there holding by his thousand hands Pattiças, swords, clubs,
darts and axes (122–134). Having his thousand hands adorned with gloves,
finger-protectors and various weapons that best of Dānavas shone there
in exceeding beauty (135). Sending up a leonine shout in anger that
Asura, having eyes reddened in anger, drew his huge bow and exclaimed
"Wait! Wait!" Hearing those words of Vāna in the battle-field that
unconquerable son of Pradyumna saw his face and smiled (136–137). Like
unto Hiranyakashipu’s car formerly in the battle between gods and Asuras
the chariot of the highly powerful Vāna was drawn by thousand horses,
set with hundreds of small bells, adorned with red standards and flags,
coated with bear-skin and was ten furlongs in length. Beholding that
Asura about to attack him, Aniruddha, the foremost of Yadus, was highly
pleased and filled with anger. Like unto Narahari prepared to kill the
prince of Daityas in the days of yore he stood impassionately for battle
with his sword and armour on (138-141). Vāna then saw him approach with
sword and leathern-protector. Beholding him thus approach on foot with
dagger and leathern protector Vāna attained to an excess of joy thinking
that he would kill him. That Yādava had a sword in his hand, but no coat
of mail. Still thinking Aniruddha invincible the powerful Vāna
confronted him for battle (142–144). He exclaimed in anger "Arrest him!
Kill him!" While he thus cried in the battle-field Pradyumna’s son
looked, in anger, at his face and laughed. At that time stricken with
fear Ushā began to weep. Aniruddha, consoling her with a smile, stood
for the battle.

Thereupon filled with anger, Vāna, desirous of killing Aniruddha,
discharged in numerable arrows by name Khshudraka. Aniruddha too,
desirous of defeating him, cut them off (145–148). Thereupon desiring
that he would kill Aniruddha in the battle-field Vāna aimed at his head
many Kshudraka arrows. Aniruddha too baffled them with his
leathern-protector and appeared before him like the rising sun
(149-150). Afterwards Vāna, with a thousand quick coursing and sharpened
arrows, pierced the invincible son of Pradyumna to the quick. As in the
forest a lion over powers an elephant on seeing it before him so the
Yadu prince Aniruddha overpowered Vāna (151–152). There upon thus
wounded with those arrows the larged-armed Aniruddha was inflamed with
anger for displaying a wonderful feat. Assailed with that downpour of
arrows and having his body covered with blood he went before Vanā’s car
(153–155). The soldiers then assailed Prādyumna’s son with sharpened
swords, maces, darts, Pattiças and Tomaras. And although sorely wounded
he did not tremble (156). Then leaping up in anger in that battle-field
he, with his dagger, cut off the reins of Vāna’s car and struck the
horses. Seeing it Vāna, an expert in fighting, threw him down from there
with a shower of arrows, Pattiças and Tomaras. Then desisting from the
fight, the Dānavas, regarding Aniruddha dead, sent up a leonine shout
and jumped up on the car. (157–159). Thereupon Vāna, irate, took up the
dreadful and grim-looking Sakti, effulgent like the sun and burning
fire-brand and set with bells and discharged it not carrying for Ushā’s
widowhood. Beholding that life-ending Sakti about to fall on him the
highly powerful Kāma’s son, foremost of men, leaped up, took hold of the
Sakti and pierced Vāna with that. Cutting through his body it entered
into the earth. Wounded sorely thereby Vāna supported himself on a
standard. Thereupon seeing him unconscious Kumbhānda said (160-164). "O
king of Dānavas, why do you disregard this rising enemy? We see this
hero has gained his aim and is impassionate. Resorting to your illusory
prowess, fight with him or else he will not be slain. Do not disregard
such an enemy out of indulgence. Save yourself and us by virtue of your
illusory power. If you cannot defeat him by your illusory power forsooth
he will kill all the Asuras. Kill him, O hero, before he destroys us
all. Killing hundreds of others he will carry away Ushā" (165-167).

Excited at these words of Kumbhānda, the king of Dānavas, the foremost
of speakers, filled with great anger, gave vent to the following harsh
words:—"I will kill him in this battle. I will catch him as Garuda
catches a serpent" (168-169). Saying this the powerful Vāna, with his
chariot standard and horses resembling the city of Gandharvas,
disappeared therefrom showering sharpened arrows and covering him with
them. Seeing Vāna invisible the unconquerable son of Pradyumna, endued
with manliness, cast his looks on the ten quarters. Thereupon resorting
to his Tamasik learning and covered with illusory form that highly
powerful Dānava, filled with anger, began to discharge sharpened arrows.
Gradually Pradyumna’s son was fettered with serpentine shafts. His body
was chained with various serpents. Thus, with all his limbs bound with
serpents Pradyumna’s son stood inert like the mount Maināka in the
battle. Although motionless like a mountain encircled by serpents of
burning fangs he was not stricken with fear. And although completely
fettered with serpentine shafts and rendered inactive and motionless,
that one, identical with all, did not experience the least pain.

Thereupon supporting himself on a standard Vāna, filled with anger,
remonstrated with Aniruddha in harsh words and said:—"O Kumbhānda, kill
soon this sinful wretch of his family having a vitiated soul who has
sullied our character in the world". Thus addressed Kumbhānda said
(170–179)—"O king, I wish to speak a few words. Hear them if you wish.
Whose son is this hero endued with the prowess of Indra? Learn first
from where he has come and who has brought him here. O king, when he
fought in the great battle, I marked him fighting like a celestial
prince. He is powerful, endued with energy and a master of weapons
(180–182). O foremost of Daityas, he does not deserve to be slain. He
has espoused your daughter in Gandharva marriage (183). You can take her
from him because you did not give her away. You should kill him after
thinking over this. Knowing this, either kill him or adore him (184). I
see a great mistake in killing him and a great virtue in protecting him.
He is one of the best of men and every way deserves honor (185). His
body is fettered with serpents and still he does not feel pain. He has a
good birth, valour, energy and accomplishments (186). Behold, O king,
this best of men, endued with great prowess. This powerful hero,
although chained, does not care for us all (187). Had he not been
fettered by virtue of your illusory power forsooth he would have fought
with all the Asuras (188). He knows all forms of warfare and is more
powerful than you. His person is fettered with serpents and covered with
blood; still frowning with his forehead stricken with three marks he is
as if aiming at us all. Reduced to such a plight and yet dependant on
the strength of his own arms he does not care for any thing, O king. Who
is this young man? Although gifted with two hands he still stands for an
encounter with you having a thousand hands and does not think of your
prowess. Who is he endued with such a prowess (189-191)? Besides, O
king, while your daughter is attached to him you will not be able to
give her away to another person. On the other hand, the hero has been
known as one of great prowess (193). O foremost of Asuras, if this
desirable person is born in the family of a great man he is worthy of
receiving adoration from you (193). I request you, save him." Thus
addressed by the high-souled Kumbhādha, Vāna, the slayer of his enemies
said "So be it." Thereupon handing over Aniruddha to the guards the
intelligent and illustrious son of Bali repaired to his own palace.
Seeing the highly powerful Aniruddha fettered through illusory power
Nārada, the foremost of Rishis, set out for the city of Dwaravati.
Having arrived at Dwāravati through the etherial way that best of Munis
communicated to Keshava, the rider of Garuda, about the imprisonment of
Aniruddha. When that foremost of Rishis Nārada set out for Dwārakā
Aniruddha thought: "This cruel Dānava will forsooth be slain in battle,
for Nārada will speak many things truly to Keshava the holder of
conch-shell, discus and club." At that time while Ushā, having her eyes
full of tears on seeing her husband bound with serpents, cried he said
to her:—"O timid girl, why do you weep thus? Do not fear, O you having
fair eyes; you will soon see the slayer of Madhu arrive here for me.
Hearing the sound of his conch shell and of the striking of his arms the
Dānavas will be destroyed and the Asura women will abort." Thus
addressed by Aniruddha the youthful Ushā was consoled and began to
bewail for her ruthless father (194–203).