TITLE: ATTRIBUTES OF NARAYANA

Jane=amejaya said:—O Brahman, after repairing with the water-born Brahmā
to his own region what did the god of gods Vaikuntha do (1)? After the
completion of the massacre of the Daityas why did the water-born deity
take away Vishnu, who had been honored by the gods, to his own region
(2)? What sort of Yoga does the Lord Brahmā, the Creator of creatures,
practise and what sort of regulations does he observe And what sort of
regions is that of Brahmā (3) How does this great universe attain to the
prosperity adored by the gods and Asuras when he does not remain there
(4) How does he lie down for rest at the end of the summer and awake
with the approach of the rains? How does he, living in the Brahmā
region, carry on the work of the world (5)? O foremost of Brāhmanas, I
wish to hear truly of the celestial conduct of this Lord in the land of
gods (6).

Vaishampāyana said:—Hear now at length of the deeds of Nārāyana before
you listen to how he sported with Brahmā after repairing to his region
(7). His course is very subtle according to his desire which even the
gods cannot know. Hear, O king, what I shall relate (8). This Lord
Nārāyana is identical with the three worlds and the three worlds too are
also permeated by him. He is identical with the gods in heaven and they
too are identical with him (9). Many persons, desirous of going to the
other end of the world, cannot see his end. This Mādhava is the end of
all (10). Hear of an account of his deeds in the Brahmaloka in the days
of yore whose true form is hidden by the senses as if with darkness and
whom the gods seek (11),

Repairing to the region of Brahmā and beholding the dignity of the
Grand-Father Vishnu honored all the Rishis with works sanctioned by the
Vedas (12). Having performed the rites of the first part of the day the
highly energetic Vishnu came to the fire where oblations were being
offered in the morning by the great Rishis (13). He saw his own body
most excellently placed in the midst of the sacrifice, worshipped with
oblations by the great Rishis and eating his own share of the
sacrificial offerings (14). Having saluted the worshipful Rishis of
Brahma energy Nārāyana, who is beyond the comprehension of thought,
began to range in the eternal Brahma region (15). Walking there in the
sacrifice he saw hundreds of sacrificial posts adorned with the tops of
Chashālas¹⁶⁹ and marked by the Brāhmana saints (16). Smelling the smoke
of oblations, hearing the sound of the chanting of the Vedas by the
twice-born ones, and beholding his own self worshipped in the shape of a
sacrifice he began to range there (17). Taking the sacred grass and
Arghya¹⁷⁰ in their hands the courtier deities and the Rishis said to him
(18):—"Whatever power exists in the gods it emanates from Nārāyana and
whatever is undertaken by the deities that also proceeds from
Madhusudana (19). That eternal Vishnu is the region of Soma and fire
about which the people hear from learned men (20). As curd is produced
from milk and clarified butter from curd so when the body and senses are
agitated by virtue of meditation the world originates from Janārddana
(21). As the great soul is comprehended by the senses and the five great
elements so Hari is comprehended by the gods, the Vedas and all the
worlds (22). As in this world of men the relation between the five
elements and senses is perceived so the strength and prosperity of the
gods in the celestial region originate from Vishnu (23). This
independent and highly sacred Nārāyana, who is the thread of the worlds
and who confers fruits of sacrifices on those who perform them, is
worshipped with Mantras like Mantra itself (24)."

The Rishis said:—O foremost of the celestials, O thou of great
effulgence, O lotus-navelled deity, hast thou come with ease? Do thou
accept this sacrificial offering offered according to the _Mantras_
(25). Thou art the sacred vessel of this water sanctified in the
sacrifice. Thou wert always known as the guest mentioned in the
_Mantras_ and hast now become visible (26). O Nārāyana, after thy
departure to the battle-field, our works were not undertaken, for a
sacrifice, without Vishnu, is never sanctioned (27). To-day we will
acquire the fruit of the sacrifice celebrated with presents. Thou art
beholding thyself worshipped by us all (28). Saying "So be it" the Lord,
in return, worshipped the Brāhmanas. The Grand-father Brahmā who was in
his region, was delighted thereat (29).

¹⁶⁹ A wooden ring on the top of a sacrificial post.

¹⁷⁰ Water to wash feet.