TITLE: THE ORIGIN OF MEN: THE BIRTH OF DAKSHA

Vaishampayana said:—When the work of his creation of progeny was
complete the Patriarch Vashishtha obtained Shatarupā, not born of a
woman, as his spouse (1). While he resided covering the etherial region,
he created Shatarupā, O monarch, by his greatness and Yoga power (2).
Having carried on rigid austerities for a million of years she obtained
her husband of burning asceticism (3). That Purusha, O my child, is
called Swayambhuva Manu. His own Manwantara in this world consists of
seventy-one Yugas (4). The Universal Purusha begat on Shatarupā a son by
name Veera who begat on Kāmyā two sons by name Pryavrata and Uttānapāda
(5). Kāmyā, the daughter of the Patriarch Kardama, gave birth to four
sons, O you of large arms, namely Samrāt, Kukshi, Virāt, and Prabhu.
Obtaining Pryavrata as her husband she gave birth to them (6) The
Patriarch Atri adopted Uttānapāda as his son. Sunritā gave birth to four
sons through Uttānapāda (7). The youthful daughter of Dharma was known
as Sunritā. She originated from a horse sacrifice and that pure damsel
was the mother of Dhruva (8). The Patriarch Uttanapāda begat on Sunritā,
four sons by name, Dhruva, Kirtiman, Ayushmān, and Vasu (9). O
descendant of Bharata, O monarch, with a view to obtain the great
Brahman, Vishnu, Dhruva carried on hard austerities for three thousand
celestial years (10). Being propitiated the Patriarch Brahmā conferred
on him a permanent region, peerless on earth, in the front of the region
of the seven Rishis (11). Beholding his great prosperity and greatness
the preceptor of the gods and demons, (Ushanā) sang the following hymn
(12). "Oh, wonderful is his energy of asceticism, knowledge of
scriptures and prowess, placing whom before them the seven Rishis are
living (13)". From Dhruva were born Shlishthi, Bhavya and Shumbha.
Shlishthi begat on Suchayā seven sinless sons (14). They were Ripu,
Ripunjaya, Pushpa, Vrikala and Vrikatejā. Ripu begat on Vrihati, a son,
gifted with all energies, by the name of Chākshusha (15). The noble
Chākshusha begat Muni on Pushkarini, a mother of heroes and the daughter
of the Patriarch Aranya (16). O foremost of Bharatas, Muni begat ten
highly powerful sons on Nadvalā, the daughter of the Patriarch Vairaj
(17), Uru, Puru, Shata dyumna, Tapaswi, Satyavān, Kavi, Agnistut and
Atirātra; and Sudyumna was the ninth (18). The tenth was Abhimanyu;
these were the sons of Nadvalā. Uru begat on Agneyi six highly powerful
sons-Anga, Sumanas, Swati, Kratu, Angiras and Gaya (19). Anga begat only
one son on Sunithā, by name Vena. By the irregularities of Vena (the
Rishis) were highly irritated (20). For creating progeny the Rishis
churned his right arm. When Vena’s right arm was churned by the
ascetics, therefrom originated Prithu (21). Seeing him the Rishis said
in delight, "This highly powerful one will delight his subjects and will
attain to fame (22)". As if burning all with his energy he took his
birth with a bow and a coat of mail. Born first in the race of
Kshatriyas, Vena’s son Prithu protected this earth (23). That lord of
the earth was the first born of those who are sprinkled with water at
the Rajshuya sacrifices. For him were born Suta and Magadha, experts in
singing the glories of kings (24). O descendant of Bharata, to give
livelihood to his subjects by him the earth was milched for corns in the
company of the gods, Rishis, the ancestral manes, Dānavas, Gandharvas,
Apsarās, serpents, Guyakas, creepers and mountains (25–26). When milched
the earth gave wished-for milk in their respective vessels; by it they
maintain their lives (27). Two sons, conversant with religion, were born
to Prithu, Antardhi and Pālita. Antardhi begat Havirdhāna on Shikhandin
(28). Havirdhana begat on Agneyidhishanā six sons—Prāchina varhis,
Sukra, Gaya, Krishna, Vraja and Ajina (29). Thus O monarch,
Prāchinavarhis, gifted with great spiritual power, was born of
Havirdhāna. He was a great Patriarch and multiplied the progeny (30). O
Janamejaya, the tips, of the Kuça grass in his sacrificial ground, were
directed towards the east and they covered the entire earth. And
therefore he was celebrated by the name of Prāchinavarhis (31). Having
carried on great austerities that king espoused Savarnā the daughter of
the ocean, who gave birth to ten sons for Prāchinavarhis who were all
called Prachetas and had mastered the science of archery (32–33).
Observing the same religion and lying in the waters of the ocean they
carried on great austerities for ten thousand years (34).

When the Prachetas were engaged in carrying on penances the trees
covered the unprotected earth and so the creatures were being destroyed
(35). The wind could not blow and the sky was covered with trees. The
creatures could set forth no exertion for ten thousand years (36).
Perceiving this and getting angry all those Prachetas, observant of
rigid austerities, created air and fire from their mouths (37). Having
uprooted those trees the wind dried them up and the fire then burnt them
up—thus their was a dreadful destruction of trees (38). Informed of the
destruction of trees and when a few plants still survived the king Soma,
approaching the Patriarchs, said (39). "O Ye kings of the family of
Prāchinavarhis, do ye control your anger. The earth is shorn of trees
and so let fire and air be pacified (40). This beautiful daughter of the
trees is like a jewel. Knowing the future I begat her (41). This girl is
called Marishā and is created for the trees. Let this great one,
multiplying the race of Soma, be your wife (42). By the half of your
energy and that of mine, your son, the Patriarch Daksha will be born of
her (43). That one, effulgent like fire, will multiply the creation
well-nigh destroyed by your fire-like energy (44)".

Thereupon in accordance with the words of Soma restraining their anger
against the trees the Prachetas duly married Marisha (45). Then they all
mentally thought of conception in Marisha. O Bhārata, the Patriarch
Daksha was born of Marisha through the tenth Prachetas with a portion of
Soma’s energy (46). Then to multiply the race of Soma he created various
offspring, mobile, immobile, two legged and four legged sons. Having
created mentally first the sons Daksha created his daughters (47). Of
them Dharma espoused ten and Kagyapa thirteen. The Lord Daksha then
conferred on the king Soma the remaining ones called Nakshatras or
planets (48), They gave birth to gods, sky-rangers, cows, Nagas,
Danavas, Gandharvas, Apsaras and various other beings (49). Since then,
O king, creatures are being engendered by sexual intercourse. Their
predecessors were created by (mere) thinking, seeing and touching (50).

Janemejaya said:—You had described before the birth of the gods, demons,
Gandharvas, serpents and Rakshasas as well as that of the high-souled
Daksha (51). O sinless one, you have said that Daksha sprang from the
right thumb of Brahmā and his wife from the left. How could they then
enter into a matrimonial alliance? (52) How could the great ascetic
Daksha attain to the energy of Prachetas? Being a grand-son of Soma how
could he become his father-in-law? I have grave doubts in this, O Vipra,
it behoves you to remove them (53).

Vaishampayana said:—Origin and destruction are always present in the
elemental creation. The Rishis and the wise are not bewildered at it
(54). O king, the Dakshas are born in every yuga. There is one Daksha in
one yuga and another in another. The learned make no mistakes in it
(55). O king, there was formerly no priority of birth among them—they
were considered elder by asceticism and their prowess was the cause
thereof (56). He, who knows the mobile and immobile creation of Daksha,
gets offspring and when the lease of his life runs out is worshipped in
the celestial region (57).