TITLE: AN ACCOUNT OF KALYA

Vaishampayana said:—One day the lotus-eyed Krishna, having a dark-blue
hue and a beautiful countenance, capable of assuming forms at will and
wearing a feather of crow, without being united with Sangkarshana, began
to range alone in that charming forest. Bearing the mystic mark of
Srivatsa on his breast he shone there like the moon with the mark of a
hare (1–2). His arms, bedecked with Angadas and his tawny colored two
little moving feet shone there like brilliant lotuses (3). His two
pieces of yellow raiments, creating delight of the world and resembling
the filaments of a lotus, shone there like the evening clouds (4). Ropes
and rods were shining in his two plump and moving hands engaged in the
work of tending kine and worshipped by the celestials (5). Charming
fragrance, resembling that of a dark-blue lotus, was coming out from his
beautiful and lotus-like mouth adorned with picturesque lips (6) His
countenance, embellished with dishevelled locks, was shining like a
lotus encircled by black-bees (7). Garlands of new grown buds of Arjuna,
Kadamba and Nipa flowers were shining on his head like a garland of
stars in the sky (8). That hero, of dark-blue hue of the clouds of the
rainy season, with a garland of the same colour around his neck, shone
there like the month of Bhādra incarnate (9). The clean leaves, tied to
the thread round his neck, shone there beautiful when shaken by the
gentle breeze raised by peacock feathers (10).

Thus ranging every day in the forest that youth used some where to sing,
some where to sport and walk and some where to make, of his own accord,
the charming music of of Parna and bugle for pleasing his kine. Ranging
in that wonderful forest and fanned by the charming wind proceeding from
the trees that powerful and effulgent Krishna, dark blue like cloud,
attained to most excellent delight. It was resonant with the notes of
peacocks, its caves were echoed with the muttering of clouds that excite
lust in men, it was adorned with plantain trees and covered with new
grown grass, twigs and lotuses. It abounded in many fountains and was
fragrant with the filaments of lotuses like the treath of females
expressing their desire (11–17). While, ranging in that forest one day,
along with his kine, he saw there a foremost of trees with high branches
(18). Enveloped with thick leaves it was stationed on earth like a
cloud. With its height it traversed half of the sky and if contained as
it were the enjoyment of the wind (19). Covered with fruits of blue and
diverse other colors and resorted to by various birds it appeared like a
cloud accompanied by rain-bow (20). The wind and cloud were as if
simultaneously living in the trees resembling houses, adorned with
creepers and flowers and bent down on account of their huge roots (21).
As if by his pristine good deeds, that great tree, who could give
protection against rain and the rays of the sun, was ruling over others
there (22). Beholding this Bhāndiraka fig-tree resembling the summit of
a mountain the sinless Lord Krishna desired to live there (23).
Thereupon engaged in sport there along with other cow-herd boys of his
own age, as in the city of the celestials, he spent the day there (24).

While Krishna began to sport there under Bhāndiraka tree the other
cow-herds amused him with various wild plays (25). The milkmen began to
sing there and the boys, fond of amusing, sang there many songs relating
to Krishna (26). When they thus began to sing in accompaniment with the
music of Panava, the powerful Krishna, too at times, played on his flute
and Tumvi (27).

One day while tending his kine, Krishna, having the eyes of a bull,
repaired to the bank of Yamunā abounding in trees adorned with creepers
(28). He saw the delightful wind blowing on the water; and the foremost
of rivers Yamunā, embellished with lilies and lotuses, was as if with
her waves, casting her glances (29). All her landing stairs were
well-levelled and her water was sweet; she had many lakes and her
current was strong. And all the trees (on her bank) were shaken by the
watery air (30). It was resonant with the notes of swans, Karandavas and
Sārasas and resorted to by Chakravākas and other fowls that range in
pairs (31) Her water was filled with acquatic animals, was endued with
all the good qualities, was variegated with various water-born flowers
and was rendered yellow by water-born corals (32). The passing currents
were her feet, the bank was her hip, the whirlpool was her navel, the
lotuses were her hairs, the cavity of the bank was her belly, the three
curves of the wave were her three marks on the fore-head, the sides of
the bank were her expansive face, the foams were her teeth, the swans
were her smiles, the dark-blue lotuses were her lips, the water-born
flowers were her eyes having bent down eye-brows, the lakes were her
forehead, the corals were her beautiful hairs, the long extending
currents were her high arms, the serpents were her ears, the geese were
her ear-rings, the lotuses were her beautiful eyes, the trees grown on
her banks were her ornaments, the fishes were her ornaments for the
waist, the other sorts of corals were her silken raiment, the notes of
Sārasas were the sound of her Nupuras, the Kāsa flowers were her cloth,
the Swans and tortoises were the auspicious marks, fishes and crocodiles
were her pastes; the animals were playing in the ditch and men formed
her rising breasts. The animals were agitating her water and her banks
were filled with hermitages. Seeing this beautiful river Yamunā, the
queen of the ocean, Krishna, as if to beautify her the more, was ranging
there (33—41). Ranging thus he saw there a vast lake filled with deep
water and resembling the sky crested with clouds. It extended over a
_Yojana_ and even the celestials could not cross it. Its water was deep
and motionless like that of the ocean. It was cast off by beasts,
acquatic animals and water-fowls. There being many ponds with serpents
on its bank, people, with very great difficulty, could traverse it. It
was enveloped with smoke proceeding from poisonous trees. The sages,
desirous of performing three oblations in a day, could not enjoy its
water. What to speak of its being used by men requiring water it was
unworthy even of the beasts. Even the birds could not range in the sky
overhanging it and the grass burnt up in no time as soon as it fell into
it. Even the gods could not approach that lake extending over a _Yojana_
on all sides. And the trees there were being consumed by the dreadful
poisonous fire (42–47). Beholding in that province freed from all
calamities, such a huge lake at a distance of a Krosa north of Vraja
Krishna began to think (48). "To whom does this huge and deep lake
belong? Methinks that dreadful king of serpents Kalya, resembling a heap
of collyrium of whom I had heard before and who has left the ocean in
fear of the king of birds Garuda, who feeds on serpents, is living here.
By him this Yamunā, flowing to the ocean, has been polluted (49–51). And
in fear of that king of serpents no one lives here. Protected by the
ministers of that serpent king, doing him good, this dreadful forest,
filled with grass and various trees and creepers, has become unworthy of
being resorted to like the sky and being touched like a poisonous food
(52–54). The banks, filled with corals, trees and creepers, are being
protected by his attendants, doing him good. And two artificial roads
are seen running over its two banks (55). I should, however, vanquish
this king of serpents. I should defeat the serpent in such a way as may
render the water of lake useful to the inhabitants of Vraja, and so that
delightful winds may blow here and the landing stairs may become worthy
of use (56–57). In order to vanquish these wicked ones always following
the wrong ways I have taken my birth as a milkman and am living amongst
the cow-herds (58). Therefore sporting like a child I shall climb this
Kadamba tree, jump into the lake and vanquish Kalya (59). Doing this my
superior power of arms will be known to all" (60).