TITLE: NARADA GIVES A HISTORY OF VRATAS PERFORMED BY OTHER

LADIES.

Uma said:—The chaste woman, who wishes that her friends and relatives
may be accomplished, should fast on every seventh day of a fort-night
for one year. After the completion of the year, she should give to a
Brāhmana a golden tree accompanied with money gifts. She will then have
pious kinsmen (1–2). O pious and foremost of ladies, she, who duly
places a lamp before a _Karanja_ tree for one year and a golden one on
the day in which the year is complete, becomes the mother of sons, a
favourite of her husband by virtue of her beauty and shines over the
other wives of her lord like a lamp (3–4). O auspicious lady, the chaste
woman who does not cut others to the quick with her harsh words, does
not take her food on Wednesday and does not use a harsh word, who always
takes food last of all, who is pure in her habits, who serves her
father-in-law and mother-in-law, who regards her husband as her god and
who is truthful, does not stand in need of the performance of a Vrata or
fasting (5-7).

O youthful and chaste lady, if any chaste woman accidently suffers
widow-hood she should observe some rites laid down in the Puranas. Hear,
I shall describe them. Remembering the virtuous conduct of the pious, a
widow should place an earthen image of her husband or a painting of his
likeness and should worship it (9). While performing a Vrata or fasting
and especially at the time of taking meals a chaste lady should take the
permission of that image. The widow, who does not disobey her husband,
goes to his region like Shāndili and shines there like the sun (10–11).
From to-day the celestial damsels will learn the eternal religious rites
that have been laid down in the Puranas (12). The pious-souled Muni
Narada will learn the entire code of regulations relating to fast and
Vrata as described in the Puranas (13). O most excellent daughter of
Soma, in the matter of extending religious rites according to the rules
of fast and Vrata as mentioned before the virtuous Aditi, Indrani and
yourself will be most celebrated in the band of chaste women. In all the
incarnations of the high-souled Vishnu his wives will always be informed
of the rules of the eternal Punyaka rite. O chaste lady, what more shall
I speak; of all the virtues and especially amongst the duties of women,
devotion to husband, absence of wickedness and that of sin even by words
are the foremost (14–17).

Narada said:—Thus addressed by the great goddess, beloved of Hara, the
ascetic ladies, having Tapas for their wealth, saluted her and went away
(18). According to the regulations mentioned before, Aditi, ever
observant of religious rites, performed the _Umā Vrata_. The Vrata, in
which she having bound Kashyapa to the Pārijāta tree, gave him to me, is
celebrated by the name of _Aditi-Vrata_. And according to the rules of
that Vrata Satyabhāmā has presented her gifts (19–20). Sāvitri too, ever
stationed in virtue, observed that. Vrata. At present Satyabhāmā has
properly performed this Vrata. It has excelled all others (21). If this
Vrata is performed in the evening or at a proper place, worship,
recitation of names and prostration bear double the fruit. Celebrating
_Savitri Vrata_ and _Aditi-Vrata_, a chaste lady can save the family of
her husband, that of her father and her own self too (22–23). Having
performed a rite according to the rules of _Uma-Vrata_ Indra’s queen
distributed numberless crimson-coloured raiments and food with fish and
meat (24). There is another rule laid down for this Vrata which should
be observed on the fourth day. According to it one should fast day and
night, and give away a hundred jars. O illustrious lady, having
performed that _Uma-Vrata_ the goddess Gangā bathed early in the morning
in her own water. O beloved queen of Hari, while performing this
_Gangā-Vrata_ in the light-half of the month of Māgha, if one bathes in
any other water, it is said to give all desired-for objects (25–27). O
beloved wife of Hari, having performed the _Ganga-Vrata_ a woman,
cognizant of all religious rites, can save seven generations of both the
sides (28). O auspicious lady, while performing this _Ganga-Vrata_ that
dissipates sorrows and grants all objects of desire one should give away
a thousand jars (29). O beloved queen of Hari, in a country where the
dewy season prevails, one can perform the Vrata that Yama’s wife
celebrated and which passes by the name of Yama-Vratha (30). O
auspicious lady, having bowed unto her husband after bathing, a woman,
of pure conduct, while performing this Vrata, should address the
following words to the sky:—"As I am, while performing the Vratā
Jāmaratha, holding the dew on my back, I may become foremost of those
women whose sons survive and of those who are devoted to their husbands.
May I rule over the other wives of my husband, may I not see Yama and
may live happily for ever with my husband and sons. May I, by virtue of
this Vrata, repair to the same region with my husband, become rich, have
good raiments, become open-handed, fond of my own people and
accomplished" (31–34). Hiving done so she should offer honey to a
Brāhmana and make him recite benedictory verses and then feed him with
sessamum and pudding (35). O beloved wife of Hari possessing the hue of
an immortal, thus the goddesses observed the diverse Vratas described by
the great goddess, the wife of Rudra (36). I tell you the truth; by
virtue of my ascetic powers you will reap the fruits of auspicious and
holy rites, described in the Puranas, which the goddess Umā obtained
before (37-38).

Vaishampāyana said:—Thereupon by virtue of the boon conferred by Umā
Rukshmini observed, by her celestial vision, all the rules of Vrata and
performed it (39). She gave away bulls, jems and food because they yeild
greater fruits and grant all desired-for objects in all the forms of
Umā-Vrata (40). O Janamejaya, having celebrated this Vrata formerly
Jāmavati too made a present of a beautiful jewelled tree. Having
performed this _Umāvrata_ Satyā distributed a number of yellow raiments.
O descendant of Kuru, having performed this holy rite Shatabhisha
acquired the most exalted position amongst the stars (41-44).