TITLE: AN ACCOUNT OF HARYASHWA

Vaishampayana said:—With Rohini’s son the powerful Vasudeva began to
live happily in the city of Mathura filled with Yādavas (1). Gradually
his person shone greatly in the beauty of youth and regal prosperity.
And delightedly he began to range in Mathurā adorned with woods (2).
Once again incited by his two daughters and remembering the death of
Kansa, Jarāsandha, the king of Rajagriha, made preparations for a battle
(3). In this wise the mighty car-warriors Yādavas fought seventeen times
with Jarāsandha but could not kill him in battle (4). Thereupon
accompanied by his four-fold forces the prosperous king of Magadha made
preparations for the eighteenth expedition (5). Out of shame for his
previous defeats and with a view to slay Krishna, the highly-powerful
and valiant king of Rajagriha the beautiful Emperor Jarāsandha, like
unto the king of gods in prowess, set out encircled by a huge army. And
despite his many endeavours he again came back unsuccessful (6-7).
Hearing that Jarāsandha had desisted the Yadavas, stricken with his
fear, began to hold counsels (8). There upon the highly effulgent
Vikadru, well-read in moral laws, said to the lotus-eyed Krishna in the
very presence of Ugrasena (9).

"O my child Govinda, listen to the origin of our family. I am relating
it because the proper time has come. Act according to my words, if you
regard them proper, O pious one (10). Listen, I shall describe at length
the origin of this race of Yadavas as related by Vyasa conversant with
the knowledge of spirit (11). In Manu’s race flourished a celebrated and
prosperous king by name Haryashwa born of Ikshwāku, and powerful like
Mahendra himself (12). Like unto Indra’s Sachi he had a beloved spouse
by name Madhumati the daughter of the Daitya Madhu (13). She was
youthful and of matchless beauty and used always to carry out king’s
wishes. And so she grew dearer than his very life (14). Observing the
vow of one wife that daughter of the king of Dānavas, of a beautiful hip
and capable of assuming forms at will, although a woman, used to satisfy
the desire of that foremost of Ikshāwkus like the sky-ranging Rohini
(15). O Mādhava, once on a time banished from the kingdom by his eldest
brother, that lotus-eyed foremost of kings Haryashwa, conversant with
the knowledge of time, left Ayodhya of his own accord. And with very few
members with him he repaired to woods with his dear wife and began to
live there. One day the lotus-eyed Madhumati said to the king who had
been exiled by his brother (16-18). ’O foremost of kings, do thou cast
off all desires for thy kingdom. Let us both go to the house of my
father Madhu (19). There is the charming forest of Madhu like unto the
city of the celestials where the trees pour down flowers and fruits as
desired. We shall enjoy there happily (20). O king, thou art dear unto
both my parents and for my satisfaction thou art dearer unto my brother
Lavana too (21). So united with him we shall be able to enjoy there
happily as if we are in our own kingdom. O foremost of men, repairing
there like unto the immortals in the garden of Nandana we shall enjoy
there as if in the city of gods. May good betide thee (22). O sovereign,
greatly vain is thy brother. He cherishes malice against us and is
always proud of his kingdom. We should therefore renounce him (23). Oh
fie on such a wretched habitation and dependance like a slave.
Therefore, O hero, let us both go to my father’s house’ (24).

"Although he had no desire of bringing about the destruction of his
eldest brother through the help of his father-in-law the lust-stricken
king however liked the words of his wife (25). Thereupon after that
foremost of men the king Haryashwa, stricken with desire, had repaired
with his beautiful wife to the city of Madhu the king of Dānavas said to
him with love:—’Welcome to thee, O my son Haryshwa, I am pleased to see
thee (26-27). O foremost of kings, I confer on thee all this my kingdom
except the Madhu forest; do thou live here (28). In this forest Lavana
will become thy help and guide in destroying thy enemies (29). Do thou
rule over this prosperous kingdom abounding in kine, filled with
cow-herds and adorned with the water of the ocean (30). O my son, if
thou dost live here thou shalt have a huge mountainous fortress and thy
extensive kingdom, consisting of prosperous villages and cities, will be
the abode of kings (31). The country, that is watered by the ocean, is
freed from dangers. There thou shalt have an extensive territory by name
Anarta (32), O king, that will however come to pass in time. Do thou now
engage in performing the duties of a king in this country (33). O my
child, in time thy family will be amalgamated with the Yadu race
originating from Yayati. Although born in the Solar Dynasty thy race
shall constitute a subdivision of the Lunar race (34). My desire is, O
my child, that after conferring upon thee this most excellent territory
I shall repair to the ocean the abode of salt for carrying on ascetic
observances (35). O my son, being united with Lavana, do thou rule over
this prosperous and extensive kingdom for multiplying thy race (36)’.

"Hearing those words of Madhu and exclaiming ’do thou enter into water’
Haryashwa accepted the kingdom and the Daitya too repaired to the abode
of Varuna, the asylum of ascetics (37).

"Thereupon Haryashwa, highly effulgent like unto an immortal, laid out a
city for habitation on that best of mountains (38). That kingdom named
Anarta, consisting of beautiful cities and precious kine, grew
prosperous in no time (39). Inhabited by subjects Anupa country, adorned
with forests, situate on the bank of the ocean and abounding in walls
and villages, was filled with fields and corns (40). The highly powerful
king Haryashwa, enhancing the delight of the subjects and cities, ruled
over the prosperous kingdom with glory and in pursuance of the royal
duties (41). By the perfect administration of the high-souled Haryashwa
that prosperous kingdom became endued with all the characteristics of a
kingdom and gradually increased in dimension (42). Adorned with royal
accomplishments, that king, O lord, stationed in a kingdom, by his
conduct and morality acquired the prosperity of his family (43).
Thereupon gradually desiring for a son the intelligent Haryashwa began
practising holy observances. He begat on Madhumati his highly
illustrious son Yadu (44). Gifted with a voice like the blare of a
bugle, irrepressible unto his enemies and endued with all regal marks
the highly energetic Yadu began to grow up gradually (45–46). He was the
only begotten son of the high-souled Haryashwa who ruled over the
prosperous earth (47). Therefore having ruled piously for ten thousand
years over his kingdom suffering no deterioration the king Haryashwa
disappeared from the earth and repaired to the city of the celestials
(48). Thereupon the subjects installed the valiant Yadu in the kingdom.
After the demise of his sire the beautiful Yadu, like unto Indra
himself, (from whom the Yadavas have sprung) rose like the sun and
governed the earth. (During his regime) the fear of robbers was
dispelled (49–50).

"Once on a time while engaged in sporting in the water along with his
liberal wives like unto the moon (surrounded) by stars the king began to
swim in the water of the ocean he was all on a sudden assailed by the
powerful king of serpents Dhumavarna (51-52). Dragged by the king of
serpents he was taken to his city, which had pillars and doors made of
diamond, was adorned with a heap of pearls, white conch-shells, masses
of various other jewels, corals and trees covered with foliage. It
abounded in leading serpents living in the belly of he ocean and in its
middle were temples of golden or moon-like lustre (53–55). That lord of
kings saw there in the clear water of the ocean the city of the serpent
chief built as if like one on the surface of the earth (56). Ease at
heart the king Yadu entered that structure of fathomless water filled
with serpent females (57). To him was offered a most excellent watery
seat made of jems strewn over with lotus leaves and hung together by a
lotus thread (58). When the king Yadu sat on that superb serpent seat
Dhumavarna, the king of Pannagas, respectfully said (59).

"’O foremost of Yadus, having established this great family on earth and
begotten you, a highly powerful sovereign, your father has gone to
heaven (60). O my child, the family, the very mine of kings, that your
father has established for the behoof (of the world), will be known as
Yādava after your name (61). O lord in this your family, the gods, the
Rishis and the eternal sons of the great Uragas will take birth as men
(62). O foremost of kings, therefore, in pursuance of your own duties
and by virtue of patriarchal deeds, accept these five maiden daughters
of mine begotten on the sister of Yuvanashwa. You are worthy of
obtaining a boon and I shall confer one upon you (63–64). Those, who
will be born in your family, will be celebrated by the names of Bhouma,
Sātwata, Bhoja, Andhaka, Yadava, Dāshārha and Vrishni—these seven
(families) (65).’ Having said this and with water in his hands the
foremost of Pannagas, Dhumavarna, who was observing the vow of a
daughter, gave away to him cheerfully his daughter. And then delightedly
he conferred on Yadu the following boon:—’O giver of honors, these my
five daughters will give birth to five sons endued with the energies of
their parents in equal proportions. By the power of my boon all the
kings, born in your family, will be able to assume forms at will and
range in water" (66-69)’.

"Having thus obtained the boon and the five maidens the king Yadu, like
the moon, rose up soon from the water (70). Adorned with celestial
garlands and unguents the king, in his bridal dress and encircled by the
five ladies like unto moon in the midst of five stars, visited the
entire inner apartment of the serpent (71–72). Then having consoled his
five fire-like wives the king, filled with great delight, returned to
his own city (73)".