TITLE: A QUERY REGARDING THE ORIGIN OF THE ARTICLES OF FOOD

Janamejaya said:—Having installed Prithu the son of Vena, in the office
of the Lord Paramount the Patriarch began to confer kingdoms on Soma and
others (1). He placed Soma in charge of the twice-born, herbs, planets,
stars, sacrifices and hard austerities (2). He then installed Varuna as
the king of waters, Vaishravana as the lord of kings, Vishnu the king of
Adityas, Pāvaka the king of Vasus, Laksha the king of Patriarchs, Vāsava
the king of Maruts, Pralhāda of incomperable energy the king of Daityas,
and and Danavas, Yama, the offspring of the sun, as the king of the
departed manes, Nārāyana as the king of Mātris, vows, Mantrās, kine,
Yakshas, Rākshasas and kings and Siva, having the emblem of a bull, as
the king of Sādhyas and Rudras (3–7). He then ordered Viprachitta to
become the king of the Dānavas and made Girisha (Siva) the holder of
mace, the king of all ghosts and goblins (8). He made Himavān, the king
of mountains, and the ocean the king of rivers and appointed the greatly
power Vāyu as the king of smell, bodiless creatures, sound, ether and
earth (9). He made the lord Chitraratha the king of Gandarvas, Vāsuki,
the king of Nāgas and Takshaka the king of serpents (10). He ordered
Airavat to become the king of the elephants, Ushaishrava, of the horses
and Garuda the king of birds, tiger the king of beasts and the bull, the
king kine, Plaksha the king of trees, and, installed Parjanya as the
king of ocean, rivers, showers and Adityas (11—13). He installed Sesha
as the king of wild animals and Takshaka, the king of reptiles and
serpents (14). He made Kāmadeva the king of Gandharvas and Asuras and
Samvatsara the king of seasons, months, days, fortnights, moments,
conjunctions of planets, Parvas, Kālas, Kāshthās, Pramāsha, Ayanas,
Mathematics and all conjunctions. Having divided the kingdom in such an
order Brahmā placed all the guardians of the quarters. He installed
Sudhanna, the son of the Patriarch Vairaja as the Protector of the
eastern quarter. He placed in the South the high-souled Sankhapāda, the
son of the Patriarch Kardama. He installed the high-souled Ketuman, the
son of Raja, as the king of the West. And he made the irrepressible,
Hirany roma, the son of the Patriarch Prajanya, the king of the North.
Even now they have been piously ruling over their respective provinces
of the earth consisting of seven insular continents and mountains. By
all those kings Prithu was appointed as the Lord Pāramonnt in a Rajshuya
sacrifice according to rites laid down in the Vedas, O king (15–23).
After the expiration of the highly vigorous Manwantara of Chakshusha the
Patriarch Brahmā conferred the kingdom on Manu Vaivaswata. If you wish
to listen, O sinless king, I shall give you at length an account (of his
life) for your help. This has been described fully in Purana. It is
sacred and confers fame, longevity, residence in heaven and auspicious
ness (24–25).

Janamejaya said:—O Vaishampāyana, do thou describe in full, the birth of
Prithu and how by that high-souled one this earth was milched (26); how
was she milched by the ancestral manes, gods, Rishis, Daityas, Nagas,
Yakshas, serpents, mountains, Pishachas, Gandharvas, the leading
Brāhmanas, Rakshasas, and other great creatures, (27–28). Do thou also
describe fully, O Vaishampāyana, their various vessels, the calves and
the various articles in order, for which she was milched (29). Do thou
also relate, why formerly Vena’s arm was churned by the angry Rishis
(30).

Vaishampāyana said:—O Janamejaya, listen, with attention and
concentrated mind, I shall give you a detailed account of Prithu, the
son of Vena (31). O monarch, I do not describe this unto him, who is
impure, little-witted, who is not a worthy disciple, who does not
observe vows, who is ungrateful and injures people (32). O king, do thou
listen duly to this theme described by the god-like Rishis which secures
heaven, longevity, fame and riches (for all) (33). He, who having
saluted the Brāhmanas daily, listens to the birth story of Vena’s son,
Prithu, does not grieve for iniquities committed by him (34).