TITLE: SATYABHAMA’S RESENTMENT AND KESHAVA’S CONSOLATION TO

HER.

Vaishampāyana said:—Finding the sage (Narada) seated with Rukshmini, the
high-souled Keshava that knower of all things, set out under some
pretext (for the mansion of Satyabhama) (1). He proceeded quickly
towards the spacious mansion of Satyabhama that was built on the
delightful Raivataka hills by Visvakarma himself (2). Slowly Vishnu
entered (the palace) as he was aware that the daughter of Satrajit, his
beloved queen—she dearer to him than this own vital breaths, had been
under the influence of jealous resentment (3). Affectionately thinking
of that beloved one who was then excited with jealousy, the slayer of
Madhu proceeded with slow steps, and with greater fear (4). Engaging
Pradyumna to entertain and attend upon Narada and telling his servant
Daruka _"Wait at the gate,"_ he entered into the palace of Satyabhama
(5). There he saw from a distance, his beloved wife then inside the
apartment of anger²⁸⁰ in the midst of her handmaids sighing hot and
frequently in consequence jealous wrath (6). (He saw) her laughing a
derisive laugh mixed with sighs at the lotus that she had brought near
her own lotus-like face, and had been nipping with her nails (7).
Sometimes he saw her describing figures on the ground with the tip of
her toe slightly bent, and (sometimes) laughing gently with her face
turned towards her back (8). Sometimes he saw his lotus-eyed queen of
exquisite shape and form merged in deep thought, the while the lotus of
her face resting on the lotus of her left palm (9). Sometimes he saw his
unblameable wife take the delightful sandal from the hands of her maids,
smear it on her breast and then again cruelly throw it aside (10). He
saw her rise from her bed and fall into it again and again. There Hari
saw these and many other actions of her dear wife (that indicated the
pitch of her resentment) (11).

Now as the daughter of Satrajit laid her head on her pillow, previously
covering it with her veil, Janardanna thought "This is my opportunity
(for effecting an entrance into her room)" (12). Then by (manual) signs
commanding the handmaids not to announce his presence, he approached
Satyabhama with faltering steps (13). Taking up the fan and standing by
her side, he then began to fan slowly and laugh gently (14). That
illustrious one (Hari), then perfumed in consequence of his contact with
the _Pārijāta_ flower, diffused there a divine, super-natural and rare
fragrance (15). Smelling that wondrous fragrance, and taken with
admiration, Satyā uncovered her face, and said "What is this?" (16) Then
rising from her bed, she of pure and gentle smiles, without bestowing a
glance on her godly husband, began to question her maids about the cause
of the fragrance (17). But thus questioned, the maids could not say
anything, and kneeling down on the ground they waited there with
countenances cast down towards the earth and with palms joined together
(in supplication) (11). Then (as if) not finding the source of that
wonderful fragrance, Satyabhama bethought herself thus:—"The earth emits
diverse kinds of smell; can this fragrance be one of her excellent
emissions?" (19) Then when wondering as to what this could be due, she
was looking on all sides, her glance suddenly lighted on Kesava that
creator of the worlds (20). She said "Ah! right," and then suddenly her
eyes became dimmed with tears, the intensity of love filling her all the
more with jealous anger (21). With her delicate lips pouting and herself
sighing, that beautiful lady of dark eyes then turned her down-cast
countenance away in another direction, and remained thus for a while
(22). Then contracting her brows in a disapproving frown and placing her
face on her palms, she said to Hari with her eyes upraised, "Thou
lookest beautiful" (23). Tears of jealous passion began to flow down
from her eyes, like drops of dew falling from a pair of lotus-petals
(24). The lotus-eyed Krishna then seeing tears flow down from the
lotus-like countenance of her wife, approached her in haste and held
them in her hands (25). Then wiping off with his hands those tears that
were falling on her breast, that wearer of the mark of _Srivatsa_, the
lotus-eyed Vishnu spoke to her as follows (26):—"O lotus-eyed one, O
most beautiful and excellent lady,–for what reason is it that tears flow
down from thine eyes likes drops of dew from a pair of lotuses (27)? O
fascinating lady-why do thy countenance and thy body wear the shape of
(appear like) the full moon in the morning sky, or the full-blown lotus
at noon²⁸¹ (28) O thou of delicate waist, what is the reason that thou
dost not wear to-day garments sprinkled with safflower and gold-dust,
but choosest the white and plain ones (29)? Although the garments
decorated with safflower and gold-dust thou likest most, why hast thou
then worn the white garments which ladies do not like to wear except at
the time of worshipping the gods (30)? O thou of beautiful limbs—say why
are thy limbs unadorned with ornaments? Why, O most excellent lady, is
thy seat for writing letters soiled with tears. (31)? Why, O thou of
beautiful shape, do the fragrant white sandal (and not red) and the
white silk cloth (not yellow or blue) veil thy beautiful forehead (32)?
O dearest object of my heart, O thou of expanded eyes—thou hast thus so
bedimmed the brightness of thy countenance as to cause, O dear one,
great pain to my mind (33). The unctuous and refrigerent sandal paste
that loves thy forehead most, does not look beautiful on that seat for
writing letters²⁸² (34). Thy neck, deprived of ornaments, does not
appear beautiful, just as the autumn sky does not look beautiful being
devoid of the planets and stars and the silvery beams of the moon (35).
Why dost thou not to-day greet me, with language flowing out from thy
smiling face that breathes the perfume of the lotus and vies with the
beauty of the full moon (36). Why dost thou not to-day cast even a
partial glance on me? Why dost thou heave sighs and shed tears that mar
the beauty of the collyrium of thine eyes (37)? O thou of complexion
bright like the blue lotus, O intelligent lady! do thou not weep any
more! Do not shed tears soiled with the collyrium of thine eyes only to
prejudice the beauty of thy incomparable face (38). O thou of divine
beauty—I am known in the world as thy servant; Why then, O most
excellent lady, dost thou not command me as before? (39). What act, O
beautiful queen, repulsive to thee, have I committed, for which, O dear
one, thou gavest thyself so much pain (40)? I have never neglected thee,
in thought, in actions or in words; this, O thou of exquisite limbs, I
tell thee in all sooth (41). O beautiful lady, I entertain it is true,
regard for my other wives—but save in thyself my regard and affection do
not reach the consummation (42). O thou that may be compared with the
daughter of the gods,—my love for thee will not wane even if my life
were taken away from me; know this to be my firm belief (43). Just as
endurance, &c., are the constant qualities of the earth, just as sound
is the constant quality of space, so sure is my love for thee, O thou of
brightness like the lotus-bud (44). Just as flame is in fire, divine
brightness is in the sun, and unfading charms are in the moon, so my
love resides in thee and thee only (45)."

When Janardana had thus spoken in his vindication, the blessed
Satyabhāma, wiping off the tears of her eyes addressed him slowly in the
following manner (46). "Hence-before, O lord, my firm belief was that
thou wert mine own. But to-day I come to perceive that thy love for me
is nothing more than ordinary and common-place (47). I did not know
before that the course of time is uncertain. But I have come to know
to-day that the course of the world is fickle (48). I entertained the
fond hope that so long I live, thou only shalt be my second self and I
thine. But what is the good of talking much; I know thy heart, O
infallible one (49). I see that thou usest fascination in speech only
and thy love for me is false; whereas it is true in regard to the other
wives of thine (50). Knowing me to be simple and attached to thyself,
thou, O foremost of men, dost neglect me with thy cruel, guileful
conduct (51). This surely is more than enough! I have seen what is
worth-seeing and have heard what is worth-hearing. I have perceived the
fruition of thy love for me (52). Be that as it may, I have made up my
mind to devote myself to the performance of severe penances, and if thou
cherishest any love for me, thou ought to permit me to do so; for
whatever vows or penances women may observe, must be with the permission
of their husbands, in as much as those that are undertaken against the
husband’s consent, surely become fruitless" (53-55).

Having thus spoken that chaste and beautiful lady again wiped off the
tears from her eyes; then that blessed one of pleasing smiles, catching
the end of Hari’s yellow garment covered her face with it (55).

²⁸⁰ This used to be a separate room in the palace of ancient queens,
 where they resorted in order to indicate their annoyance or anger
 at the conduct of their husbands.

²⁸¹ The moon wanes in the morning and the lotus withers down at noon.
 Krishna asks in circumlocution the cause of the lady’s pale and
 placid appearance.

²⁸² It appears that the lady had lain her head down on the seat in
 consequence of which it was besmeared with the sandal of her
 forehead.