TITLE: AN ACCOUNT OF KASHI KINGS

Vaishampayana said:—Rambhā had no issue. I shall describe the progeny of
Anenā. His son was the highly illustrious king Pratikshatra (1). His son
passed by the name of Srinjaya whose son was Jaya and his son was Vijaya
(2). His son was Kriti whose son was Haryaswan. His son was the powerful
king Sahadeva. Sahadeva’s son was the virtuous-souled Nadina whose son
was Jagatsena whose son was Satkriti. Satkriti’s son was the
pious-souled and highly illustrious Kshatravriddha ever satisfying the
duties of a Kshatrya. I have thus described the progeny of Anenā. Hear
now of the descendants of Kshatravriddha (3-5). Kshatravriddha’s son was
the highly illustrious Sunahotra. He had three highly pious sons whose
names were Kāsha, Shāla and Gritsamada. Gritsamada’s son was Shunaka,
whose offspring, the Saunakas, were Brāhmanas, Kshatriyas, Vaisyas and
Sudras. Shāla’s son was Arshnisena whose son was Sutapa. O king, Kāsha’s
sons were Kāshya and Dirghatapā. The latter’s son was the learned
Dhanwantari. At the termination of the rigid penances of the intelligent
old king Dirghatapā Dhanwantari arose from the ocean and took his birth
for the second time in this world (6–10).

Janamejaya said:—O lord, why was Dhanwantari born in the land of men? I
wish to know this duly and truly from you. Describe it therefore (11).

Vaishampāyana said:—O foremost of Bharatas, hear of the birth of
Dhanwantari. When ambrosia was being churned out in the days of yore
Dhanwantari arose from the ocean. Enveloped completely with personal
grace he came out of the vessel of ambrosia. Meditating on Vishnu who
grants success in business he stood up as soon as he saw Him (11–13).
Vishnu said to him "As you have come out of water you will be known by
the name of _Avja_." And so he passed by the name of Avja (14). Avja
then replied:—"O lord I am your son. Confer upon me therefore, O lord of
celestials, a share in the sacrificial offerings and a place in this
world." Thus addressed and seeing him the Divine Lord spoke to him the
truth (15). "The gods, who present themselves at _Yajnas_, have already
made apportionments of sacrificial offerings amongst themselves. The
great saints too have dedicated various articles of oblation to various
gods. Know therefore, I shall not be able to give you any thing however
trifling it may be, that is not mentioned in the Vedas. O my son, you
have been born after the gods and so you will not be able to partake of
sacrificial offerings (16–17). In your second birth you will gain renown
in the world. While in the womb you will acquire _Animā Siddhi_⁵⁷ (18).
With that body you will acquire the dignity of a god. The twice-born
ones will worship you with _Charu_, _Mantra_, vows and _Japas_ (19). You
will propagate Ayurveda with its eight divisions. This work, which is
sure to come off, is known to you in your watery birth (20). When the
second Yuga Dwāpara will set in you will undoubtedly take your birth
again." Having conferred this boon on Dhanwantari Vishnu disappeared
again (21). Thereupon when the second Dwāpara Yuga set in Sunohotra’s
son Dirghatapā, the king of Kashi, desirous of having a son, began
carrying on hard austerities affording delight to his worshipful deity
saying (22)—"I shall lay myself under the protection of that god who
will confer on me a son." That king worshipped the deity Avja for a son
(23). Thereupon that Divine lord, being pleased with the king, said to
him "O you of good vows, I shall grant you any boon that you may choose
to have" (24). The king said "O lord, if thou art pleased be born unto
me as my illustrious son." Then saying "Let it be so" he disappeared
therefrom (25). The deity Dhanwantari was then born in his house. He
became the king of Kāshi who could destroy all diseases (26). Having
acquired the kowledge of Ayurveda from Bharadwāja he divided the work of
the physicians into eight classes and then conferred it upon his
disciples (27). Dhanwantari’s son was known by the name of Ketumān whose
son was the heroic Bhimaratha (28). His son was the king Divodāsa. The
pious-souled Divodāsa became the king of Bārānashi (29). O king, at this
time the Rakshasa Kshemaka, an attendant of Rudra, made the city of
Bārānashi divested of its inhabitants (30). The intelligent and
high-souled Nikumbha uttered a curse against Bārānashi saying, "Thou
shalt forsooth have none to live in thee for one thousand years" (31).
As soon as this curse was pronounced against Bārānashi the king Divodāsa
laid out his charming capital on the bank of Gomati (near Bārānashi)
(32). Formerly Bārānashi belonged to Bhadrashenya, son of Mahishmān, of
the Yadu race. Having slain the hundred sons of Bhadrasenya who were all
most excellent bowmen Divodāsa acquired that city. Thus Bhadrasenya was
deprived forcibly of his kingdom by the (king Divodāsa) (33–34).

Janamejaya said:—Why did the powerful Nikumbha imprecate a curse on
Bārānasi? Who is the virtuous Nikumbha who pronounced a curse on that
holy land (25)?

Vaishampāyana said:—Having acquired that prosperous city the highly
powerful emperor, the royal saint Divodāsa began to live there (36). At
this time, having accepted a gift the lord Siva was living at his
father-in-law’s residence for pleasing the goddess (his wife Durgā)
(37). At the command of the god (Siva) the great saints Pārshadas, born
in a respectable family, in this above mentioned form and dress, were
propitiating Pārvati (38). The great goddess Pārvati was highly pleased
thereby but not so was Menakā. She began continually villifying that god
and goddess (39). She said to Pārvati:—"Your husband Maheswara is always
doing vile things in the company of Pārshadas. He is always poor and his
character is not good" (40).

Thus spoken to by his mother the goddess became enraged as is usually
the case with women. Smiling a little she came to Bhava (41). With her
countenance pale the goddess said to Mahādeva:—"O lord, I shall not live
here; take me to your own house" (42). In order to find out a house for
himself Mahādeva eyed all the world. O descendant of Kuru, the highly
powerful Maheswara selected Bārānashi where every body attains to the
consummation of religious culture. Learning that Divodāsa had occupied
the city, Bhava said to Nikumbha who was by him:—"O king of _Ganas_, go
to the city of Beneres, and make it shorn of its inhabitants by mild
means for the king there is very powerful."

Thereupon going to the city of Bārānasi Nikumbha appeared in a dream to
a barber by name Kanduka and said to him. "O sinless one, I shall
encompass your well-being. Place a faithful image of mine in the city."
O king, what he commanded in a dream was all carried out (43–48). Having
duly made an announcement to the king at the gate of the city he began
daily to worship him (Nikumbha) with scents, garland, incense, lamps,
food, and drink. This appeared to be extremely wondrous (49–50). Thus
the lord of _Ganas_ was daily worshipped. Thereupon he began to confer
thousands of boons on the citizens, such as sons, gold, long life and
various desired-for objects (51). The eldest queen of the king Divodāsa
was celebrated by the name of Suyasha. Despatched by her husband that
chaste damsel appeared there for a son (52). Offering him a grand _Pujā_
she prayed for a son. Thus did she daily come there for a son (53). But
for some reason Nikumbha did not give her a son, thinking "If the king
gets enraged I shall accomplish my object" (54). Thereupon after a long
time the king was possessed by anger. He said "This ghost, stationed at
the main gate, is delightedly conferring hundreds of boons on my
citizens; why does he not confer one on me? My people in this city are
always worshipping him. I requested of him for a son for my queen. Why
does not that ungrateful wretch confer a son on me (55–57)? So this
ghost does not deserve good treatment from any, especially from me. I
shall therefore have the habitation of this vicious-souled one
destroyed" (58). Having made this resolution that vicious-souled, wicked
king sacked the house of that king of _Ganas_ (59). Having seen his own
house destroyed Nikumbha imprecated a curse on the king saying, "I have
committed no offence; and still while my house has been ruined, this
city, all on a sudden, shall be shorn of its people" (60).

Thereupon by his curse the city of Bārānasi was divested of its people.
Having pronounced that curse against the city Nikumbha went to Mahadeva
(61). The inhabitants of Bārānasi suddenly fled away to different
directions. The God Siva then built his own house in that city (62).
Mahādeva lived there sporting with the daughter of the Mountain-king. On
account of the liberation being given even to those who did not deserve
it the goddess did not like that place. She then said "I shall not live
here" (63). Siva said:—"I do not live in my house. My house (body)
remains always intact. I shall not go there. Go you, O goddess, to your
house (64)." The three-eyed lord, the slayer of Tripura said these words
with a smile. From that time that city has been spoken of as _Avimukta_
by the god Siva himself (65). Thus Bārānasi has been described as
Avimukta (66). The pious-souled Deity Maheswara, adored of all the gods,
lived there in the company of the goddess for the three Yugas, Satwa,
Tretā, and Dwapara (67). The city of that high-souled god disappeared in
the Kali Yuga. When that city disappeared Maheswara lived there
invisible. Thus Bārānasi was cursed and peopled again (68). Bhadrasenya
had a son by name Durdama. Having slain the hundred sons of Bhadrasenya
Divodāsa spared him out of mercy considering him a child (69). O great
king, the emperor Durdama was adopted by Haihaya as his son. In order to
put an end to hostilities, Bhadrasenya’s son the high souled Kshatriya
king Durdama took back again his ancestral kingdom which had been
forcibly occupied by Divodāsa (70-71). Divodāsa begat on Vrishadvati the
heroic Pratardana. That boy son of his again defeated Durdama (72).
Pratardana had two sons by name Vatsa and Bhāga. Vatsa’s son was Alarka
whose son was Sannati (73). Alarka, the king of Kāshi, was truthful and
devoted to Brahman. The ancient sages composed the following hymn in
praise of the royal saint Alarka (74). "This foremost of the rulers of
Kashi will enjoy youth and beauty for sixty thousand and sixty hundred
years (75)". By the favour of Lopamudrā he gained that longevity. That
youthful and beautiful king had an extensive kingdom. After the
termination of the curse that mighty-armed king slew the Rakshasa
Kshemaka and laid out again the picturesque city of Bārānasi. Sannati’s
son was the pious Sunitha (76-77). Sunitha’s son was the highly
illustrious Kshemya whose son was Ketumān whose son was Suketu (78). His
son passed by the name of Dharmaketu, whose son was the mighty
car-warrior Satya ketu. His son was the king Bibhu whose son was Avarta,
and whose son was Sukumāra. His son was the highly pious Dhristaketu,
whose son was the king Venuhotra, and whose son was the king Bharga. The
province of Vatsa belonged to Vatsa and the land of Bhrigu derived its
name from Bhargava (79–82). These sons of Angiras were born in the race
of Bhrigu. He had thousands of sons amongst the Brāhmanas, Kshatriyas
and Vaisyas. Thus I have described to you the family of Kashi kings. I
shall now describe the progeny of Nahusha (83–86).

⁵⁷ Final emancipation from existence.