TITLE: JARASANDHA’S ARMY

Vaishampayana said:—Holding their counsels all the Yādavas, headed by
Janārddana, surveyed the encampment of the kings in the gardens of
Mathurā. Afterwards with a delighted heart Krishna said to
Rāma:—"Forsooth the accomplishment of the object of the gods is near at
hand since king Jarāsandha has come near us. The pennons of the cars,
coursing like air, are being seen (1–3). Behold, O Sir, there shine the
umbrellas of kings desirous of victory, white as the moon (4). The rows,
of white umbrellas stationed on the cars of the kings, are moving
towards us like swans ranging in the sky (5). However the king
Jarāsandha has arrived here in proper time. He is our first guest of
battle and is the touch-stone for testing our strength or weakness (6).
O Sir, while the emperor has arrived here, we must begin with the fight.
Judge now the strength of the enemy’s army (7)". Giving vent to these
words without any anxiety, Krishna, desirous of slaying Jarāsandha and
fighting with him, began to survey his army (8).

Having taken a survey of the assembled kings and armies, the immortal
Krishna, the foremost of Yadus conversant with _Mantras_ began to think
within himself (9). "These are the kings assembled who wend the ways of
the mortals and will meet with death on account of their own actions as
pointed out by scriptures (10). I consider these leading kings, on the
verge of death, sprinkled by Death like unto sacrificial beasts. Their
bodies are all shining as if they are about to repair to the celestial
region (21). Assailed by the armies of these sovereigns and exhausted
with the weight of their burden Prithivi (earth), covered with powerful
kingdoms, went to Brahmā in the celestial region. In no time the surface
of the earth will be shorn of men (12-13). And kings by hundreds will be
killed."

Vaishampayana said:—The highly powerful, effulgent and persevering Lord
Paramount Jarāsandha came there encircled by fore-fold ocean-like forces
consisting of war-chariots containing beautiful seats and drawn by
powerful steeds whose course is never obstructed any where, cloud-like
elephants embellished with bells and golden seats, ridden by
car-warriors well-read in the science of war and driven by clever
charioteers, horses, going in leaps and bounds, driven by horsemen and
resembling clouds and numberless fearful foot-soldiers armed with swords
and coats of mail who could bound up in the sky like serpents (14-19).
Innumerable kings attentively followed him. All the quarters of the city
and her woods, resounding with the rattle of cars resembling the
muttering of clouds, the tinkling of the ornaments worn by elephants in
rut, the neighings of the horses and the leonine shouts of the infantry,
the Emperor Jarāsandha, with his army, appeared like an ocean. With
shouts and slapping of arms, the armies of these kings, consisting of
proud warriors, appeared like an army of clouds. That army, consisting
of cars and infuriated elephants, quick-coursing horses, and infantry
resembling the sky-rangers, appeared like a collection of clouds
descending on the ocean in the rains (20-24). Thereupon all the kings,
headed by Jarāsandha, with their armies encamped around the city of
Mathurā (25). The detachments of the army accomodated in the tents shone
like the ocean overflowing in the light half of the month (26). After
the expiration of the night those kings, desirous of fighting, rose up
for entering into the city (27). Those kings, assembled on the bank of
the Yamunā, began, out of curiosity, to hold proper counsels on the eve
of the battle (28). Then there was heard a great tumult of the kings
resembling that of the heaving deep at the time of the universal
dissolution (29). At the command of the king, elderly guards, with
head-gears on their heads and canes in their hands, began to move about
exclaiming _Ma_ (_i.e._ Do not make noise) (30). Thereupon that army,
hushed into silence, shone like an ocean abounding in fishes and huge
serpents (31).

When informed of the mandate of the king that huge ocean-like army stood
motionless and silent like a Yogin, the king Jarāsandha, spoke, like
Vrihaspati (32). ’Let the armies of the kings united lay siege on all
sides to this city (33). Let them get ready stony weapons and maces and
let all the level grounds be overflowed with water. Let them hold up
swords and daggers (34). Let them assail the city with Tankas and
Khamitras. And let kings, expert in the ways of war, near the city (35).
As long as I do not kill in the battle, with sharpened arrows, the two
sons of Vasudeva Krishna and Sangkarshaa, in the guise of milkmen, as
long as the sky is not covered with Tankas so long my army should lay
seige to the city (36-37). Let all the kings, obeying my command, wait
at the outskirts of the city and enter as soon as an opportunity
presents itself (38). Let the Maira king, Kalinga king, Chekitan, the
king of Vālhika, Kashmira king Gonarda, the king of Karusha, Druma of
Kimpurasha country and the Danava of hill tracts, unitedly and speedily
protect the western gate of the city (39–40). Let Venudari of the Puru
race, Sonaka the king of Vidarbha, Rukshmi the king of Bhojas, the
Malava king, Suryaksha, the highly powerful Drupada, the king of
Panchalas, Vinda and Anuvinda of Avanti, the powerful Dantavakra,
Chhāgali, Purumitra, the emperor Virāt, the king of Koushāmvi, Mālava,
Shatadhanwā, Viduratha, Bhurishrava the king of Trigartta, Vānga and
Panchanada all these illustrious kings and powerful like a thunder-bolt
now capable of attacking a fort, get upon the northern gate and assail
the city (41-44). Let Ansumāna’s son the heroic Kaitaveya, Uluka,
Ekalavya, Vrihatkshatra, Kshatrādharmā, Jayadratha, Uttamoujā, Shalya,
Kourāvas, Kekayas, Vāmadeva the king of Vidisha, Sāngkiti and the king
of Seni occupy the eastern gate of the city. Let them proceed destroying
everything as the wind disperses the clouds (45–47). Myself, Darava and
the powerful king of Chedi will protect the Southern gate with our army
(48). Thus beseiged on all sides by these armies let the city entertain
a great fear like that at the fall of a lightning (49). Let club-holders
with clubs, Parigha-holders with Parighas and other soldiers with
various other weapons rend the city (50). By you, O kings, this city, of
up hills and down hills, should be levelled down to-day (51).’

Having thus arranged his four-fold forces the king Jarāsandha, along
with other kings, proceeded angrily towards the Yādavas (52). The clever
and well-armed warriors Dāshārhas too confronted them. Thus there
commenced a terrible fight, abounding in cars and elephants, between
that overwhelming army of the kings and the limited number of Yādavas
like that between the gods and Asuras (53). At that time beholding the
two sons of Vasudeva issue out of the city the armies of the kings lost
heart and the animals grew terrified and bewildered (54). Seated on a
car those two descendants of Yadu, Rāma and Krishna, began to move about
in anger like two Makaras that agitate the ocean (55). Thereafter when
in perfect sense they began to fight in the battle there arose in them
their ancient intelligence regarding the use of weapons (56). And even
in that battle-field there fell down from the sky, strong, flaming and
great weapons (57). In order to feed upon the flesh of the kings, those
huge weapons, assuming bodily forms, stricken with thirst (as if),
adorned with celestial garlands and scents, burning in their own
effulgence and terrifying the sky-rangers, descended from the welkin.
And Rākshasas, desirous of eating royal flesh, followed them (58-59).
When in that great battle came down for those two Yadavas, the
ploughshare Samvartaka, the mace Sounanda, Srānga the foremost of bows,
the club Koumodaki—these four powerful weapons of Vishnu, the beautiful
Rāma, the foremost of Sātwatas, took up first of all, with his right
hand, the plough-share, embellished with celestial garlands, rising like
a flag and proceeding obliquely like a serpent, and that foremost of
maces Sounanda that creates depression in the enemy (60–63). The
powerful Krishna took up the celebrated bow Srānga which is worthy of
being seen by all the worlds (64). The other hand of the lotus-eyed
Krishna, the necessity of whose incarnation was known to the gods, was
adorned with the club by name Koumodi (65).

Thus armed the heroic Rāma and Govinda, resembling Vishnu himself,
opposed the enemies in battle (66). Displaying their prowess and
discomfitting their enemies those two heroic sons of Vasudeva, dependant
on each other and designated by the appellations of elder and younger
brothers, began to range there like two gods (67–68). Raising up in
anger his plough-share resembling the king of serpents, ranging in the
battle-field like the very death of his enemies and drawing in the cars,
elephants and steeds of the Kshatriya car-warriors Rāma began to appease
his anger (69–70). Throwing up these mountain-like elephants with the
end of his plough-share and as if churning them with the strokes of his
mace he began to move about in that battle-field (71).

Thus brought on the point of being almost destroyed by Rāma the leading
Kshatriyas returned in fear to Jarāsandha, who, observant of the duties
of a Kshatriya, said thus to them:—"Fie on your Kshatriya conduct, since
you have returned from the battle-field in fear (72–73). The learned say
that those, who, deprived of their cars, fly away from the battle-field,
are visited by an unbearable sin like that of infanticide (74). Why do
you fly away, O terrified Kshatryas? Fie on your conduct. Urged on by my
bows do you return soon (75). You need not fight. Wait here as
spectators. I shall myself despatch these two cow-herds to the abode of
Yama (76)."

Thus urged on by Jarāsandha the Kshatriyas again rallied round with
delighted hearts. And spreading a net-work of arrows they again engaged
in fight (77). Armed with coats of mail, Nishtringshas, pennons, swords,
flags, bows with strings, quivers and arrows and accompanied by horses
embellished with golden chaplets, cars followed by a rattle like the
muttering of clouds and elephants resembling clouds and driven by
drivers they again set out for the battle-field (78–79). With rising
umbrellas held over their heads and fanned by beautiful chowries the
kings, stationed on cars, shone greatly in the battle-field (80). Taking
up heavy clubs and maces, some warrior-kings, foremost of car-warriors,
out of love for war, entered the battle-field (81).

In the meantime, seated on a most excellent car, adorned with a pennon
carrying the emblem of Garuda the powerful Vāsudeva, ever increasing the
delight of the celestials, approached carefully Jarāsandha and pierced
him with eight arrows, his charioteer with five sharpened shafts and his
horses with other arrows. Beholding Jarāsandha in this perilous plight
the mighty car-warriors Chitrasena and the Commander-in Chief Kaishika
both cut Krishna with arrows. And Kaishika pierced Baladeva with three
arrows (82–85). With his spike the heroic Baladeva sundered his bow into
two pieces and creating in no time a downpour of arrows assailed many a
hero with his arms embellished with gold. Worked up with anger
Chitrasena wounded him with nine arrows (86-87). Then Kaishika wounded
him with five arrows and Jarāsandha with seven. Janārddana wounded them
each with three winged arrows (88). The powerful Baladeva struck
Chitrasena’s car with ten sharpened arrows (89). Baladeva, with his
spike, sundered his bow into two pieces. With his bow shattered and
deprived of his car, the powerful Chitrasena, greatly worked up with
anger and desirous of slaying the holder of plough-share, proceeded
towards him. The highly powerful Jarāsandha cut off the bow of Rāma who
was discharging Nārāchas in order to kill Chitrasena (90–91). The king
of Magadha, in anger, struck his horses with his club. The highly
powerful and heroic Jarāsandha thus confronted Rāma (92). Then taking up
a mace Rāma pursued Jarāsandha. An encounter then took place between
them both desirous of killing each other (93). Beholding the Magadha
king fight with Rāma, Chitrasena, ascending a war-car, encircled
Jarāsandha with a huge army of elephants and other warriors. Then began
a close fight between the two armies (94-95). Thereupon surrounded by
his huge army the highly powerful Jarāsandha attacked the Yādavas who
preceded Rāma and Krishna (96). Then there arose a great tumult from
both the armies like that of an agitated ocean (97). O king, there was
heard a great sound of the numberless bugles, conches and trumpets of
both the armies (98). On all sides were heard the shouts and the
slapping of the arms of the soldiers. And a storm of dust was raised by
the hoofs (of the horses) and the wheels (of the cars) (99). And there
stood roaring at one another, heroes armed with bows and various other
weapons (100).

Thereupon giving up all hopes of life, thousands of highly powerful
car-warriors, elephant drivers and infantry fearlessly engaged in fight.
And a terrible encounter took place between Jarāsandha’s army and the
Yādavas (101-102). O Bhārata, placing Baladeva before them and taking a
half of their army Sini, Anādhrishthi, Babhra, Vipritha and Ahuka
attacked the sothern flank of the enemy’s army protected by Jarāsandha,
the king of Chedis, the highly powerful Udichya, Salya, Sālya and other
kings. And renouncing all hopes of life they began to discharge arrows
(103–105). O foremost kings, Avagāha, Prithu, Kanka, Satadyumna and
Viduratha, led by Janārddana, with the other half of the army attached
the detachment protected by the highly powerful Bhishmaka, Rukshmi,
Devaka, the Madra king and the kings of the West and South endued with
energy and prowess. And casting off all hopes of life they began a
dreadful fight discharging, Saktis, Rishthis, Prāsas and arrows
(106–108). On that battle encircled by a huge army Salyaki, Chitraka,
Shyāma, the energetic Yuyudhāna, Rajādhideva, Mridara, the mighty
car-warriors Swaphalka, Prasena, and Satrajit, attacked the left flank
of the enemy’s army. They began to fight there attacking half of the
enemy’s army led by Mridara and assisted by the highly powerful western
kings headed by Venudari and the sons of Dhritarāshtra (109-111).