TITLE: AN ACCOUNT OF MANWANTARAS

Janamejaya said:—O Vaishampayana, O you having asceticism for your
wealth, do you describe at length all the Manwantaras and the creations
previous to them (1). O. Brahman, I wish to hear, in sooth, of all the
Manus and the extent of their reigns (2).

Vaishampāyana said:—O descendant of Kuru, I cannot give a detailed
account of Manwantaras even in hundreds of years. Do you hear from me in
brief (3). O descendant of Kuru, Swayambhuva, Swārochisha, Auttami,
Tāmasa, Raivata, Chakshusha, the present Manu Vaivaswata, the four Manus
Savarne, Bhoutya, Rouchya and Manu Sāvarna—these all are Manus. I have
described, as I have heard, of Manus, present, past and future. I will
now describe the Rishis, the sons of Manus, and the celestials who were
born in the various Manwantaras (4-7). Marichi, the reverend Atri,
Angira, Puloha, Kratu, Pulastya and Vasishtha—these seven are the sons
of Arahmā (8). O king, during Swāyambhava Manwantara there were seven
Rishis and the celestials by the name of Yamas in the north. Agnidhra,
Agnivāhu, Medha, Medhātithi, Vasu, Yotishman, Dyutiman, Havya, Savana
and Putra: these were the ten highly powerful sons of Manu Swayambhuva.
I have thus described to you, O king, the first Manwantara (9–11). O
child, during Swārochisha Manwantara narrated by Vayu, Aurva, the son of
Vasistha, Stambha, the son of Kagyapa, Prāna, Vrihaspati, Datta, Atri
and Chyavana—these were the great Rishis of great vows and Tushitas were
the gods (12-13). Havirdhra, Sukriti, Jyoti, Apomurti, Ayaprathita,
Nabhasya, Nabha and Urja—these were the sons of the high-souled
Swarochisha Manu. They have been described, O king, as being gifted with
high energy and prowess (14–15). I have thus described to you the second
Manwantara. Hear, O king, I shall describe the third (16). The seven
sons of Vasishtha, celebrated under the name of Vasishtha and the highly
energetic sons of Hiranyagarbha by name Sutejas were the seven Rishis,
as I have said. O monarch, Auttama had ten beautiful sons. Hear I shall
describe them (17–18). They were Isha, Urja, Tanurjja, Madhu, Mādhava,
Suchi, Sukra, Saha, Nabharya and Nabha (19). It is said that the Bhanus
were the celestials in that Manwantara. Hear, I shall describe the
fourth Manwantara (20). O descendant of Bharata, Kāvya, Prithu, Agni,
Jahnu, Dhāta, Kapivan and Akapivān—these were the seven Rishis (21), O
descendant of Bharata, in Puranas their sons and grandsons have been
mentioned. Satyas were the celestials in Tāmasa Manwantara (22). O king,
I shall now enumerate the sons of Tamasa Manu-Dyuti, Tapasya, Sutapa,
Tapomula, Tapogana, Taporati, Akalmāsha, Tanvi, Dhanvi and
Parantapa—these ten were the sons of the highly powerful Manu Tāmasa. So
Vayu has said (23-24). During the fifth Manwantara Vedavāhu, Yadudhra,
Muni, Vedaçira, Hiranyaroma, Parijanya, Somasuta, Urdhavahu, Atreya and
Satyanetra were the seven Rishis. The celestials of that period passed
under the name of Abhutarajas—having their nature not permeated by the
quality of darkness. There were also two other classes of celestials by
the name of Pāriplava and Raivya (25–27). Hear, I shall enumerate the
names of their sons—Dhritimān, Avya, Yukta, Tatwadarshi, Nirutsuka,
Arany, Prakāsha, Nirmoha, Satyavāk and Kadi were the sons of Manu
Raivata-and this is the fifth Manwantara (28-29). Hear, O king, I shall
describe the sixth Manwantara. Bhrigu, Nabha, Vivaswān, Sudhāmā, Virajā,
Atinamā and Sahishnu these were the seven Rishis in the sixth
Manwantara. Hear the names of the celestials who flourished in
Chākshusha Manwantara (30–31). O king, Adya, Prasuta, Rishabha
Prithokbhava and Lekha—these have been recorded as the five classes of
deities. The high-souled and the highly energetic sons of Angiras were
the Rishis (32). O monarch, those ten sons, Uru and others, passed under
the name of Nādvaleyās. This is known as the sixth Manwantara (33).
Atri, the reverend Vasistha, the great saint Kaçyapa, Goutama
Bharadwaja, Vishwāmitra, the reverend Jamadagni, the son of the
high-souled Richika-these seven Rishis are now living in heaven (34–35).
The Sādhyas, Vishwas, Rudras, Vasus, Maruts, Adityas, Vaivaswān, the two
Açwinis are now all living during the present Manwantara of Vaivaswat.
He had ten high-souled sons headed by Ikshwāku (36–37). O descendant of
Bharata, the sons and grandsons of those great Rishis of great energy
are living in all the quarters (38). In all the Manwantaras, as in the
previous Kalpa, exist the forty nine Maruts for protecting and governing
the people (39). After the expiration of a Manwantara twenty Maruts,
having performed heavenly deeds, attain to the region of Brahmā freed
from all dangers (40). Thereupon others, observing rigid austerities,
succeed them. O descendant of Bharata, I have thus described to you the
past and present Manwantaras as well as the seven Manus, O descendant of
Kuru. Hear, I shall describe the Manwantara that is to come (41–42).
Hear from me an account of the five Sāvarni Manus; of them one is the
son of the Sun and the four are the offspring of Prajapati Paramesthi. O
king, they are the grandsons of Daksha and sons of Pryā. Because those
mighty and energetic ones carried on hard austerities on the mount Meru
they were called Meru Sāvarni (43–44). The son of the Patriarch Ruchi
was celebrated by the name of Rouchya. The son whom Ruchi begat on Bhuti
came by the name of Bhoutya (45). Hear now of the seven Rishis of
Sāvarni Manwantara, who have not come as yet and who are said to be
living in the celestial region (46). Rāma, Vyāsa, the effulgent and
celebrated Atreya, the highly energetic Aswathama, the son of Drona, the
son of Bharadwāja, Kripa, the son of Goutama’s son Saradvān, Gālava, the
son of Kushika and Ruru, the son of Kaçyapa—these seven high souled ones
are the future Munis. These seven Rishis are equal to Brahmā and
fortunate (47-49). By asceticism practised from their very birth, by
their knowledge of sacred formulae and grammar they will secure a
position in the region of Brahmā and will be celebrated as pure Brāhmana
saints (50). Being repeatedly born in every Yuga beginning with the
golden, the noble and truthful seven Rishis institute the various orders
and lay down their duties. They are endued with the knowledge of the
present, past and future, have themselves become, by means of their
asceticism, well known, just and considerate. By the knowledge of
formulae, and grammar and by their spiritual insight they see everything
like an emblic myrobalam in their hands. They are known as seven Rishis
by their sevenfold qualities. They are long-lived, far-sighted and have
seen the God. They are the first born, well-versed in various duties and
the founders of various families (51-55). When virtue suffers any
deterioration, the Rishis, the originators of _Mantras_ (mystic
formulae) and Brāhmanas are repeatedly born in their families (56). When
all the Rishis are capable of conferring boons and are all respectively
great there is no evidence of the time when they flourished and of their
age (57). O king, I have thus described to you the seven Rishis. O best
of the Bhārata race, hear now of the future sons of Manu Sāvarni (58).
Varian, Avarian, Sammala, Dhritimān, Vasu, Varishna, Arya, Dhrishnu,
Rāja and Sumati, these are the ten future sons of Manu Sāvarni, O
descendant of Bharata (59). Hear, I shall enumerate the names of the
Munis of the reign of the first Manu Sāvarni. Medhatithi, the son of
Palastya, Kavyapa’s son Vasu, Bhrigu’s son Yotismāna, Angira’s son
Dyutimāna, Vasistha’s son Savana, Atri’s son Havyavāhana and
Poulaha—these seven Rishis flourished in Rohita Manwantara. O king,
these were the three classes of deities (60–62). They were the sons of
the Patriarch Rohita,—the son of Dhksha, Manu’s son Dhrishthaketu,
Panchahotra, Nirakriti, Prithu, Shravā, Bhuridyumna, Richaka, Vrihata
and Gaya, these were the sons of the highly energetic first Manu Savarni
during the second Manwantara of the tenth order. Pulaha’s son Havishmān,
Bhrigu’s son Sukriti, Atri’s son Apomurti, Vasishtha’s son Ashwathāma,
Pulastya’s son Pramati, Kagyapa’s son Nabhāga and Angira’s son Nabhasa
Satya—these were the seven great saints (63–66). The two classes of the
deities and the Rishis have (already) been enumerated. Manusuta,
Uttamanjā, Kunishanja, Viryāvān, Satānika, Niramitra, Vrishasena,
Jayadratha, Bhuridyumna and Suvarcha—these ten were Manu’s sons (67–68).
Hear, I shall enumerate the names of the seven Rishis who flourished
during the eleventh period of the third Manwantara. Kaçyapa’s son
Havishmān, Bhrigu’s son Havishman, Atri’s son Taruna, Vasishtha’s son
Taruna, Angira’s son Urudhisna, Pulastya’s son Nischara, Pulaha’s son
Agnitejā,—these are the future seven great Rishis (69–71). It is said
that Brāhma’s sons, the deities were divided into three classes.
Sarvatraga, Susharmā, Devānika, Purudvaha, Kshemadanva, the long-lived
Adarsha, Parudaka and Manu—these were the nine sons of the third Manu
Sāvarni (72–73). Hear from me the names of the seven Rishis of the
fourth Manwantara.

They were Vasishtha’s son Dyuti, Atri’s son Sutapa, Pulastya’s son
Taposhana, and Pulaha’s son Taporavi. Know Bhrigu’s son Tapovriti as
their seventh. It is said, there were five classes of deities—the
mind-born sons of Brahmā (74–76). Devavāyu, Adura, Devasreshtha,
Viduratha, Mitravān, Mitradeva, Mitrasena, Mitrakrit, Mitravaha, and
Suvarcha—these are the sons of the twelfth Manu (77). During the
thirteenth Manwantara that is to come Angira’s son Dhritiman, Pulastya’s
son Havyapa, Pulaha’s son Tatwadarshi, Bhrigu’s son Nirutsuka, Atri’s
son Nishprakampa, Kacyapa’s son Nirmoha and Vasishtha’s son Sutapa will
be the seven Rishis and three classes of deities as mentioned by the
self-sprung (Brahmā) (78–80). During the thirteenth Manwantara Manu’s
sons were the sons of Ruchi, Chitrasen, Vichitra, Naya, Dharmacrit,
Dhrita, Sunetra, Kshatra, Vriddhi, Sutapa, Nirbhaya, and Drida—these
were the sons of Manu Rouchaya in the thirteenth Manwantara (81-82).
During the fourteenth Manwantara of Manu Bhoutya, Kacyapa’s son
Agnidhra, Pulasta’s son Bhargava, Bhrigu’s son Ativahu, Angira’s son
Suchi, Atri’s son-Yukta, Vasistha’s son Asukra, and Pulaha’s son Ajita
were the last seven Rishis (83–84). Chanting the glory of their period a
man attains happiness, great renown and long life (85.) He, who recites
always the names of the great Rishis, past and present, becomes
long-lived and gains renown. O foremost of the Bharatas, five classes of
deities, it is said, flourished then (86). Tarangabhirā, Bushma,
Tarashmān, Ugra, Abhimāni, Pravira, Jishuu, Sangkrandana, Tejashi, and
Savala are the sons of Manu Bhoutya. With the completion of Bhoutya
Manwantara one Kalpa will be complete (87-88) I have thus enumerated the
names of the past and future Manus. O king, these Manus with with their
children, rule over the earth extending to the ocean for thousands of
Yugas and govern the subjects with asceticism. And they also in time
perish away as usual (89–90).