TITLE: THE PREPARATION OF THE DANAVAS FOR THE BATTLE

Vaishampayana said:—O sinless one, thereupon, hearing of the fear from
Vishnu, the Daityas and Dānavas, irrepressible in battle, began to make
preparations for war on a great scale (1). Being desirous of a battle
the Dānava Maya ascended a golden car as the sun rises over the mount
Meru. It had four strong wheels twelve hundred cubits in circumference,
could go anywhere, contained many huge weapons, was filled with the
tinkling of small bells, was matted with leopard skins, adorned with
jewels and gold, artificial figures of animals and various collections
of birds, contained many celestial weapons and quivers, had the sound
like the muttering of clouds, had beautiful axles, was the best of the
most excellent cars, was filled with beautiful nests, and mountain-like
clubs. It was huge like the very ocean itself, and its joints were
adorned with golden Keyuras and bracelets. Its poles were made of gold
and it was adorned with huge pennons and flags. It looked like the mount
Mandāra when the sun rises over it, like the prince of elephants and the
ocean. It contained thousands of bears and the sound of its wheels was
like the roaring of the ocean. It was effulgent, could course in the sky
and strike the cars of the enemies. The Dānava Tāra got upon a most
excellent iron car. It was two miles in dimension, was huge like a
collection of mountains, was black like red collyrium and was made of
strong and well seasoned iron. It had eight wheels, axles and poles and
was dark like an ember. Its sound was like the roaring of an ocean and
its windows were covered with iron nets. It contained iron Parighas,
Kshepanyas, clubs, Prāsas, maces, various other wooden weapons, Tomaras
and Parashwadas. It was a dread to the enemies and was drawn by a
thousand of mules huge like the mount Mandara. On its flag there was an
emblem of a crow (2-12). Being highly enraged and taking up a club
Virochana stood before the army like a mountain with shining summits
(13). The Dānava Hayagriva, the repressor of the hostile armies, began
to drive a car drawn by a thousand steeds (14). Stretching his huge bow,
many thousand cubits in dimension, the Dānava Vāraha stood before the
army like a fig tree covered with its branches (15), Shedding tears of
anger out of haughtiness and with his lips and teeth trembling the
Dānava Khara stood for the battle (16). Ascending a car drawn by twelve
horses and surrounded by Dānava Vyuhas the energetic Aristha began to
move about in the battle-field (17). Adorned with golden ear-rings,
Viprachitti’s son Swetā stood before the battle-field like a white
mountain (18). Armed with most excellent weapons made of stone and being
tired thereby Bati’s son Aristha stood there for battle like a mountain
(19). A Dānava, by name Kishora, resembling a young charger in pride,
appeared like the sun in the midst of the Daitya army (20). Being
dressed with a long raiment resembling a cloud the Dānava Lamva appeared
in the midst of the Daitya Vyuhas¹⁴⁶ like the sun possessed by Rāhu¹⁴⁷
(21). Taking up weapons in the shape of teeth, lips and eyes the
huge-bodied and terrible warrior Sharbhānu smilingly stood before the
Daityas (22). Some shone on the horses and others on the elephants. Some
sat on the lions and tigers and others on boars and bears (23). Some
rode the asses and camels and others rode the clouds. And others rode on
various birds and some the winds¹⁴⁸ (24). Other Daitya proceeded on
foot. Some Daityas, with dreadful faces, some with one foot and some
with two feet began to dance for battle (25). Some began to strike their
arms. Thus the leading Dānavas began to roar there like proud tigers
(26). The Daityas, expert in the use of bows, began to assail the gods
with fierce clubs, Parighas and their Parigha-like arms (27). And
sporting with maces, Prāshas, clubs hooks, swords, Sataghnies, sharpened
daggers, excellent iron Parighas and discuses they delighted the
soldiers (28–29). The Dānavas, irrepressible in battle, desired for
victory. Thus the Dānavas, proud of their various weapons, confronted
the gods like rising clouds (30). That Daitya army, consisting of
thousands of Dānavas, resembling the air, the fire, the cloud and the
mountain and filled with war-like speed and advancement, was maddened
with desire for battle (31).

¹⁴⁶ The arrangement of troops in various positions, as the array in
 line, that in column, that in circle, and that in mixed order.

¹⁴⁷ This is the mythological account of the solar eclipse.

¹⁴⁸ _i.e._ were fleet like the wind.