TITLE: THE SONS OF YADU AND THEIR CONQUESTS

Vaishampayana said:—After a long time the king Yadu begat on the five
daughters of the Nāga king five large armed royal sons, the scions of
his family, namely Muchukunda, Padmavarna, Mādhava, Sārasa and Harita
(1-2). Beholding those five sons like unto the five elements the king,
of incomparable prowess, was delighted (3).

Once on a time worked up with pride and strength the five brothers, like
unto five pillars of earth, stood before their sire and said:—"O father,
we have come of age and have been endued with great strength. Command us
soon what we shall do according to your mandate" (4-5)?

Hearing the words of his sons endued with the prowess of a tiger and
marking their earnestness for work Yadu, the foremost of kings, was
highly pleased and said (6):—"Let my son Muchukunda build up two
mountainous cities around the mountains Vindhya and Rikshavan (7). Let
my son Padmavarna build up in no time in the South a city on the
mountain Sahya (8). Let my son Sarasa lay out a charming city in the
province adorned with Champaka trees in the West on the mount Sahya (9).
Let my son, the large-armed Harita protect the island of Dhumavarna, the
king of serpents, situate in the ocean of yellow water (10). And
installed in the office of heir-apparent, let my pious and large-armed
son Mādhava, the eldest and foremost of all my sons, rule over my own
kingdom (11)".

Thereupon according to the mandate of their sire, those foremost of
kings, duly installed with chowries and others, and having attained to
regal prosperity, set out towards their respective provinces in search
of the quarters where they would lay out their cities (12-13). Having
selected the interior of the Vindhyā impassable with hills, situate on
the bank of Nermuda, for laying out his city, the royal saint Muchukunda
cleared that place, constructed a bridge on a level with Nermuda and
laid out ditches full of fathomless water around the city (14–15). In
the various wards of the city were constructed temples, carriage roads,
shops, high ways and gardens (26). Within a very short time that
foremost of kings Muchukunda adorned his city with flag-staffs and
pennons and filled it with wealth, corn and kine. It became prosperous
like (Amarāvati), the capital of Indra (17). That foremost of kings,
powerful like the king of gods, thus named his city built up by his own
power. Since this city is built under the protection of the mountain
Rikshavān and abounds in rocks it will be celebrated by the name of
Mahishmati (18-19). Thereupon between the mountains Vindhyā and
Rikshavān he laid out a highly charming city beautiful like the city of
gods, by name Purika consisting of hundreds of gardens, prosperous shops
and courtyards (20–21). Because that city was laid out around the mount
Rikshavān by the pious-souled king Muchakunda it was named Purika (22).
Thus did the powerful king Muchukanda, the foremost of the pious, build
two spacious cities worthy of being enjoyed by the gods and began to
rule over them (23). The royal saint Padmavarna laid out, on the
mountain Sahya on the bank of the river Venā, the province Padmāvata
abounding in trees and creepers with a skill like that displayed by the
celestial Architect Viswakarma. And his city was known by the name of
Karavira. Knowing the small compass of his territories the king laid out
one complete kingdom (24-26). In the well-known prosperous province of
Vanavāsi abounding in trees of all seasons Sārasa built his highly
charming city Krouncha consisting of many Champoka and Asoka trees and
coppery colored earth (27–28). Harita began to govern the island of the
ocean abounding in many jewels and beautiful women (29). In his kingdom
the fishermen, called Mudgaras, used to range in the bed of the ocean
and collect shells (30). People of other provinces used to gather heaps
of corals and brilliant pearls grown in water. (31). Searching in small
boats and collecting jewels born in water Nishādas used to gather them
in big boats (32). People of that kingdom used to feed upon fish and
meat. Taking all sorts of jewels the inhabitants of the jeweled island
used to go to distant countries in boats and used to encompass the
satisfaction of Harita only like unto the god of riches with articles
acquired by merchandise (33-34). Thus originating from the Ikshwāku race
and being divided into four by the sons of Yadu his family was split up
into four branches (35).

Having conferred in time upon Mādhava the foremost of the Yadu race his
own kingdom, the Emperor Yadu cast off his earthly body and repaired to
the city of the celestials (36). To Mādhava was born a powerful son by
name Satwata endued with the quality of goodness and endowed with every
sort of royal accomplishment (37). Sātwata’s son, the highly powerful
Bhima also became a king. After his name his descendants are called
Bhaima and those of Sātwata are known by the name of Satwatas (38).
While this king was ruling Rāma also flourished in Ayodhyā. Having slain
Lavana Satrughana (at that time) devastated the Madhu forest (39). That
Lord, the enhancer of Sumitrā’s joy, laid out in that forest the city of
Mathurā (40). When in time Rāma, Bharata and the two sons of Sumitrā
(Lakshmana and Satrughna) terminated their career on earth, Bhima, on
account of its contiguity to his own kingdom, brought that territory of
Vishnu under his own control and began to live there (41-42).

Thereupon when in Ayodhyā Kusha became the king and Lava the heir
apparent Andhaka began to govern that kingdom (43). Andhaka’s son was
the king Revata. From him was born the king Riksha on the charming
mountain situated on the bank of the ocean. After his name that mountain
is known as Raivataka in the world (44–45). Raivata’s son was the highly
illustrious king Vishwagarbha. He was greatly powerful and was a
celebrated king in the world (46). O Keshava, he begat on his three
goddess-like wives four auspicious sons like unto patriarchs by name
Vasu, Vabhru, Sushena and Sabhāksha. Each, of those leading descendants
of Yadu, acquired renown like a patriarch (47-48). O Krishna, this
family of Yadus has been spread on earth by those kings having
off-spring who were born in this family (49). Vasu had a powerful son by
name Vasudeva and two beautiful daughters by name Kunti and
Srhutrashravā (54), Kunti, ranging on earth like a goddess, was the
queen of the king Pandu and Shrutashravā was the wife of Damaghosha the
king of Chedi (51). O Krishna, thus I have related to you the origin of
your family as I had heard before from Krishna Dwaipāyana (52). At
present our family is on the verge of extinction, and therefore for
encompassing our well-being and victory, thou, as the self-sprung Deity,
art born as our leader in our family (53). Thou art omniscient and the
upholder of all. And thou art above even the comprehension of gods. We
can hide thee by recognizing thee as one of the citizens (54). O lord,
thou art capable of fighting with king Jarāsandha and we too, determined
upon entering into a fight, are ready to follow thy guidance (55).
Jarāsandha, on the other hand, is of incomparable prowess, the leader of
the entire circle of kings and has innumerable soldiers. But our
resources are limited (56). This city has a limited supply of food and
fuels. It is not protected by a fort. The diches of water are not well
kept and the gateways are not furnished with weapons. It will not
therefore be able to stand attack for even one day. Ramparts and walls,
extending over a long distance, should be constructed around it (57-58).
And the arsenal should be repaired with bricks. Kansa used to protect
his own city by his own strength and so it is not protected by many men
(59). Now when Kansa is dead and our kingdom is newly acquired this city
will not be able to stand a new seige (60). When besieged this city will
be assailed by the enemies and completely ruined forsooth over kingdom,
along with men, will meet with destruction (61). The Yādavas, whom,
taking advantage of their internal dissension and desirous of a kingdom
we have conquered, are showing signs of enmity. Do what conduces to our
well-being (62–63). On account of our king at this time when our kingdom
is in danger we shall be the butt of redicule even unto those kings who
have taken to their heels in fear of Jarāsandha (63). O Keshava, the
people, who will be obstructed in the city, will distressingly say "We
have been ruined by the internal dissensions of the Yādavas (64)." O
Krishna, I do not speak thus with a view to excite in thee thy sense of
duty, but have simply expressed my opinion out of affection (65), O
Krishna, do thou encompass what conduces to our well-being now. Thou art
the commander of this army and we are to follow thy orders. Besides,
thou art the root of their quarrel. Do thou save us as well as thy own
self (66).