TITLE: JARASANDHA PREPARES TO ATTACK MATHURA

Vaishampayana said:—United with Rohini’s son Krishna spent some days
happily in the city of Mathura filled with Yādavas (1). Gradually his
person was embellished with the grace of youth and regal prosperity and
he began to range all over Mathurā adorned with woods (2). After some
days had elapsed in this way, Jarāsandha, the king of Rājagriha, heard
of Kansa’s death from his two daughters (3). Hearing this the powerful
Jarāsandha was worked up with anger. And in order to pay his debt to
Kansa and to slay all the Yadus, the powerful Jarāsandha, in no time,
set out with his army consisting of six divisions. O king, the king of
Magadha had two very beautiful and youthful daughters by name Asti and
Prāpti. The royal son of Varhadratha conferred them on Kansa (4–6).
Having chained his father the son of Ahuka enjoyed in their company. You
have heard many a time and oft how, depending on Jarāsandhā’s (help) and
disregarding the Yadavas the lord of Surasena became king (7). In order
to satisfy his duties by his kinsmen and to accomplish their objects
Vasudeva was always carefully engaged in Ugrasena’s well-being. Kansa
did not spare him even (8). When the vicious-souled Kansa was slain by
Ramā and Krishna, Ugrasena, encircled by Bhojas, Vrishnis and Andhakas,
became king (9).

Asti and Prāpti, the wives of a hero, were the beloved daughters of king
Jarāsandha. Therefore burning like fire in anger at their instigation
and making every possible arrangement the king of Magadha started for
Mathurā. All the highly energetic warrior kings who were defeated and
subjugated by Jarāsandha’s prowess, all those who were his friends,
relatives, kinsmen and allies, encircled by their own armies, followed
Jarāsandha with a view to please him. Dantavakra the king of Karusha,
the powerful king of Chedi, the king of Kalinga, the foremost of the
powerful, Poundra, Sāngkriti, the king of Keshika, the king Bhishmaka,
his son Rukshmi, the foremost of bowmen who used to challenge Vāsudeva
and Arjuna in a fight, Venudāri, Shrutarvā, Krātha, Angshumān, the
powerful kings of Anga, Vanga, the kings of Koshala, Kashi and Dashārna,
the powerful king of Sumha, the lord of Vidha, the powerful king of
Madra, the lord of Trigarta, the king of Shālwa endued with prowess, the
highly powerful Darada, the energetic Bhagadatta the lord of Yavanas,
Saivya the king of Shouvira, Pāndya the foremost of the strong, Suvala,
the king of Gāndhāra, Mahāvala, Nagnajit, Gonarda, the king of Kāshmir,
the king of Darada, the highly powerful Duryodhana and other sons of
Dhritarāshtra—these and other highly powerful kings, mighty
car-warriors, followed Jarāsandha, out of jealousy towards Janārddana.
Entering the province of Shurasena, abounding in barley and fuels, they
all, placing their respecting detachments before them, laid siege to
Mathurā (10-22).