TITLE: SHAMVARA’S DEATH

Vaishampāyana said:—Thereupon filled with anger Shamvara took up his
club. O descendant of Bharata, when Shamvara took up his club there rose
twelve suns, the mountains trembled and the earth shook. The water of
the ocean flowed upwards, the gods were agitated, the sky was filled
with vultures, fire brands fell, dreadful wind blew and Indra sent down
showers of blood. Beholding all those evil omens the heroic Pradyumna
soon got down from his car. And folding his hands he recollected the
beloved consort of Shankara, Pārvati, and bending his head began to
chant her glories (1-5).

Pradyumna said:—"Salutation unto Kātyāyani, the mother of Kārtikeya.
Salutation again unto Kātyāyani the mother of the three worlds.
Salutation unto the goddess who hath destroyed our enemies. Salutation
unto Gouri the consort of Girisha. Salutation unto the goddess who has
killed Sumbha and pierced the heart of Nisumbha. Salutation unto
Kālarātri and Kumari. I bow with folded hands unto the goddess who lives
in a mountainous forest. I bow unto the great goddess who lives on the
mount Vindhya, who destroys the forts, who is Durgā, who is fond of
battle and who is Jayā and Vijayā. I bow unto the goddess who is
unconquerable, who afflicts her enemies, who has a bell in her hand and
is adorned with a garland of bells. I bow unto the goddess, who has the
figure of a lion on her banner, who holds a trident, who has slain the
buffalo-faced demon and rides a lion. I bow with folded hands unto the
goddess who is one and without any parts, who is the sacred Gāyatri that
is recited at a sacrifice and Savitri of the Brāhmanas. O goddess, do
thou always protect me in battle and crown me with success." Thus
eulogised by Kāma the goddess was pleased (6-13).

Pleased at heart the goddess said to him:—"O you of large arms, O you
the enhancer of Rukshmini’s joy, behold me. O son, seeing me does not go
fruitless. Pray for a boon therefore." Hearing the words of the goddess
his hairs stood erect and his mind was filled, with joy. Saluting the
goddess he communicated his object:—"O goddess, while thou hast been
propitiated do thou confer on one what I desire. O giver of honor, may I
vanquish all my enemies. O goddess, may the club, produced from thy own
person which thou hast given to Shamvara, become a garland of lotuses as
soon as it touches my body." Hearing it and saying "So be it" the
goddess disappeared (14–18). And the highly powerful Pradyumna too, with
great delight, ascended the car.

Thereupon taking up his club and whirling it the powerful Shamvara threw
it on Pradyumna’s breast. As soon as it approached him, it became a
garland of lotuses around Pradyumna’s neck. And he looked like the moon
encircled by stars (19–21). Beholding the club converted into a garland
of lotuses the gods, Gandharvas, Siddhas, and the great Rishis spoke
highly of Pradyumna in his presence. Thereupon bending his bow and
setting to it the Vaishnava arrow which Nārada had brought, Keshava’s
son said:—"O arrow, if I am the son of Rukshmini begotten by Keshava do
thou, on the strength of this truth, kill Shamvara in the battle-field."
Saying this the noble-minded Pradyumna, as if to consume the three
worlds, drew his bow and shot the arrow at Shamvara. Thereupon that
arrow, discharged by that Vrishni chief, piercing Shamvara’s breast,
entered into the earth. By the energy of that Vaishnava arrow all his
flesh, bones, nerves, skull and blood were reduced to ashes.

In this way the huge-bodied, sinful Dānava Shamvara being slain the gods
and Gandharvas were filled with joy. Urvasi, Menakā, Rambhā,
Viprachitti, Tilottamā, and other Apsarās and the entire animate and
inanimate creation danced. Praising Pradyumna the king of gods, with the
celestials, pleased, began to shower flowers on him. The king of Daityas
being slain in battle by Madana the son of the slayer of Madhu, the gods
were freed from the fear of their enemy, and eulogising Pradyumna they
set out for the celestial region. As a lover goes to his love so
Rukshmini’s son, fatigued with fighting, went with hasty steps into the
city and met his consort (22-32).