TITLE: ANDMAKA GOES TO THE MOUNT MANDARA

Vaishampāyana said:—O descendant of Bharata, hearing attentively the
words of Nārada the great Asura Andhaka felt a desire for going to the
mount Mandara (1). Having gathered other Asuras (around him) the highly
energetic and powerful Andhaka, elated with the pride of his strength,
arrived at the mount Mandara. It was covered with huge clouds, great
herbs and virtuous Siddhas. There lived the great Rishis and it abounded
in many elephants, sandal, Aguru and various other trees. It was
rendered charming with the songs of the Kinnaras and it danced as if
with the blossoming trees blown by the wind. It was filled with the
sweet notes of the birds and swans moving about beautifully. It was
adorned with the highly powerful buffaloes, the destroyers of the demons
and lions white as the rays of the moon. It was filled with hundreds of
deer. Arriving there he said to that best of mountains existing there in
his own form. (2–8). "You know that by virtue of my father’s boon I am
not to be slain by any. The three worlds, consisting of mobile and
immobile creation, are under me. O mountain, out of fear, none is able
to fight with me. O great hill, I have heard that on your table-land
there is a forest of Pārijāta trees, the jewels of them, adorned with
flowers conferring all desired-for objects. My mind is filled with
curiosity-tell me speedily where that forest is on your table-land. O
mountain, if angry you will not be able to do any thing against me: on
the other hand if I oppress and trouble you, I do not see any one who
will be able to protect you." Thus addressed the mount Mandara
disappeared therefrom (9-12).

Thereupon worked up with great anger Andhaka, proud of his boon, set up
a terrible leonine shout and said:—"O mountain, although requested by me
you have not shown me sufficient honor. Now witness my strength—I will
crush you within this very moment." Saying it the powerful Andhaka,
elated with the pride of the boon, uprooted, with the help of the
Asuras, a summit extending over many _yojanas_ and began to grind it. O
hero, for this all the streams of that huge mountain were blockaded.
When Rudra came to know of all this he showed him such a special favour,
that it appeared in the same beauty abounding in infuriated elephants,
deer, various streams and variegated gardens, which it possessed before
it was uprooted by Andhaka (13–18).

Thereupon by the power of the Lord, the dreadful summits, uprooted by
Andhaka, brought about the destruction of the Asuras themselves (19). O
king, the mountain summits crushed those Asuras to death who uprooting
them were flying away (20). Those Asuras however, who were sitting at
ease on the table-land of the mount Mandara, were not killed thereby.
Seeing his soldiers thus crushed down Andhaka set up a terrible leonine
shout and said:—"O mountain, there is no need of fighting with you. I
invite him who is the owner of the garden situate on your elevation. Let
him come forward to fight. What is the use of carrying on the work of
destruction remaining in disguise in the battle-field" (21–23).

Thus addressed the Lord Maheswara, desirous of killing him, took up his
mace and arrived there riding on his bull (24). The intelligent,
three-eyed deity, the lord of goblins came there encircled by ghosts and
goblins. At that time when Mahādeva was worked up with anger the entire
world shook and the rivers flew in contrary courses with burning water
(25–26), O king, by Hara’s energy all the quarters were consumed with
fire and the planets began to fight with one another. O descendant of
Kuru, at that time all the mountains were moved and the god of rains
sent down showers of char-coals accompanied with smoke. And the moon
became hot and the sun cool. The Brahmavādins forgot the Vedas. O
sinless one, at that time the asses gave birth to cows and the cows to
horses. The trees were reduced to ashes and fell down on earth. The
bulls began to oppress the kine and the kine began to ride on the bulls.
All the quarters were filled with Rakshasas, Yatudhānas and Pishācas.
Beholding the universe in such an altered condition the Divine Mahādeva
cast off his mace effulgent like fire. O king, that dreadful mace,
discharged by Hara, fell on the breast of the Asura Andhaka, the thorn
of the pious, and immediately reduced him to ashes (27-33).

When the enemy of the world was slain, the gods and the Munis, having
asceticism for their wealth, began to propitiate Shankara (34).
Celestials bugles were sounded and showers of flowers fell down. O king,
the three worlds were freed from anxiety and enjoyed rest (35). The gods
and Gandharvas began to sing and the Apsaras began to dance. The
Brāhmanas began to recite the Vedas and perform sacrifices (36). The
planets resumed their natural positions and the rivers flew in their
proper courses. Fire did not burn in water. All people began to cherish
hopes (37). The foremost of mountains Mandara again shone in
beauty—adorned with its pristine prosperity and effulgence (38). Having
thus benefitted the gods the Lord Hara began to sport with Umā again in
the garden of Pārijāta (39).