TITLE: PUNYAKA DESCRIBED BY UMA

Uma said:—O you of pure smiles, when by the grace of my lord I became
omniscient I came to know of the sacred regulations of all the religious
rites (1). O Arundhati, although the regulation of sacred rites exists
eternally I however came to know of it through the favour of Mahādeva
(2). O you blameless lady, by the command of my husband, the divine and
intelligent Bhava, I performed the religions rites (3). In the Puranas
the religious rites have been sanctioned for them who desire to practise
chastity and holy rites. O pious Arundhati, gifts, fastings and
performance of good and religious works are fruitless for unchaste women
(4-5). Religious rites are contaminated by the sin of sexual
intercourse. Thereupon those, who deceive their husbands or hold a
sinful intercourse, do not attain to the fruits of sacred rites; on the
other hand they go to hell (6). Those good-natured and chaste damsels,
having husband for their God, are upholding the universe, who do not
know any other man but their lord, who cherish whole-minded devotion for
virtue and who follow the way of a chaste woman as their only refuge
(7). Those, who do not commit sin even by speech, who are pure,
intelligent, sweet-speeched and always perform pious rites, are
preserving the world (8). A wife, under no circumstances, should
relinquish her husband even if he be poor, diseased or outcasted. Such
is the eternal virtue (9). A wife can save herself and her husband even
if he be devoid of accomplishments, if he perpetrates wrong deeds and be
outcasted (10). In the Vedas the sages have laid down purificatory rites
for women who commit sin by words. But there is no penance (laid down)
for them who commit sin by sexual intercourse; consider them as fallen
for ever (11). O blessed lady, the woman, who wishes to wend the ways of
the pious, should perform rites and fasts according to the desire of her
husband (12). By a promiscuous intercourse a woman is born in a degraded
birth. And she does not attain to a better life even within a thousand
births (13). If accidently an unchaste woman is born as a woman she is
born as a Chandāla, becomes highly wicked and lives on a dog’s flesh
(14). O you having asceticism for your wealth, the sages have designated
the husband as the God of women. She is a pious and chaste woman with
whom her husband is pleased (15). There is no sacred region for those
women whose fall has been brought about by curiosity. O gentle lady,
those women, whose minds are devoted to and fixed on their husbands, and
who do not disregard them even by their words, actions and mind, attain
to the fruits of religious rites. Such has been laid down by those who
are engaged in religious ceremonies (16–17). O beautiful lady, listen
you all to the regulations of religious rites intended for the celestial
region which I have witnessed by virtue of my asceticism (18).

O you of firm vows, having risen up early in the morning and bathed, a
chaste woman, desirous of performing a penance or fasting, should salute
the feet of her father-in-law and mother-in-law and then communicate it
to her husband. Then taking Kusa grass and a copper vessel she should
first sprinkle the right horn of a cow with water. And then with this
water she should sprinkle first the head of her husband who had
controlled himself and performed ablutions. She should then pour it on
her own head. In the code of ordinances this practice is called bathing
at all the holy shrines (19–22). O great Arundhati, while performing a
Vrata or a fast both the husband and wife should bathe in this way (23).
By Hara’s energy and by virtue of my asceticism I have seen it myself.
While performing a religious ceremony one should herself wash her feet;
and using an arrow, sleeping and sitting are forbidden. While fasting or
performing a Vrata, a woman should not shed tears, quarrel or be angry
or else she would be immediately fallen (24–25). O you born of the Moon,
on the occasion of a Vrata or a fast, a woman should use a white cloth
and a white under-vest. She should use shoes made of reeds and such-like
grasses. She should avoid collyrium, perfumeries and flowers. Without
rubbing her teeth with a piece of wood and washing her head she should
perform all the purificatory rites with earth. With Vilwa and Amlaki
mixed with water and free from earth she should wash her head. She
should rub oil on her head, feet and body. While fasting or performing a
Vrata one should always avoid conveyances drawn by bullocks, camels and
asses and should not bathe naked. O auspicious daughter of Soma, it is
better to bathe in the water of a river or fountain, not to speak of
bathing in the tanks and wells full of water-born plants, which is
always regarded greatly. It is not con venient for women, who do not
come out publicly, consequently they are allowed to bathe with water
from a vessel. In such a procedure the ancient custom is to use new
vessels. One, washing her head in this way, attains to the fruits of
Tapas (26-35).