TITLE: JARASANDHA’S PROPOSAL TO INVITE KALAYAVANA

Vaishampayana said:—After the departure of Vasudeva’s son the kings, who
had their limbs embellished with ornaments and who were anxious to go to
their respective kingdoms, returned to the assembly-hall of Bhishmaka in
order to inform (Jarāsandha of their intention) (1). Thereupon king
Bhishmaka, the foremost of kings and well-read in moral laws, said to
the kings, effulgent like the sun and the moon and seated at ease on
beautiful seats (2). "O ye kings, you all know the calamity that will
befall the Swayamvara. Do you forgive me for the fruit that is the
outcome of my misconduct" (3).

Vaishampāyana said:—Having thus addressed and welcomed duly all the
kings, (the king) sent away all the monarchs of Central India and of the
East, West and Northern Provinces. Having honored the king Bhishmaka
duly in return, those kings, the foremost of men and mighty
car-warriors, went away delightedly. Jarāsandha, Sunitha, the energetic
Dantavakra, the king of Soubha, the king Mahākurma, Kaishika, all the
leading kings of the Pravara race, the royal saint Venudāri, the king of
Kashmira all those and other kings of the Deccan remained by Bhishmaka
desirous of listening to the mystery.

O monarch, beholding these kings waiting there the powerful king
Bhishmaka, with an affectionate heart and grave and cool voice, said to
them moral words relating to three-fold objects and embellished with
figures.

Bhishmaka said:—"O ye kings, I have acted thus in pursuance of moral
words given vent to by you; you should forgive me for we must always
abide by moral laws" (4-12).

Vaishampāyana said:—Having thus expressed himself in the concourse of
kings, the king Bhishmaka, well-versed in moral laws, again said aiming
at his son (13).

Bhishmaka said:—Observing the movements of my son my eyes are agitated
with fear; I consider all now as mere boys. He (Krishna) alone is the
foremost of Purushas (14). He, the very incarnation of glory, the
foremost of the illustrious, the partaker of fame and powerful, has
established great fame and the might of his arms in this land of mortals
(15). Blessed is Devaki, the foremost of damsels who has conceived as
her son the lotus-eyed Krishna, identical with the sum total of beauty,
the greatest of all in the three worlds, and adored of all the immortals
and who has seen his lotus countenance with her eyes full of affection
(16-17.)

Vaishampāyana said:—When the king Bhishmaka gave vent to these words
again and again in the midst of the assembled kings the highly effulgent
king Shalya said in sweet words (18).

Shalya said:—O slayer of thy enemies, O lord of kings, do not lament for
thy son. The Kshatriyas meet either with success or defeat in battle
(19). This is the inevitable course and eternal religion of the mortals.
Save Baladeva and Krishna what third person can withstand thy highly
powerful son in battle? Taking up his bow thy mighty-armed son is alone
capable of withstanding the car-warriors and great heroes of the enemy
in battle. When by the might of his arms he handles the Bhārgava
weapons, difficult of being used even by the celestials what man is
capable of bearing it? This Eternal Purusha Krishna is without birth or
death (20-23). In this land of mortals even the holder of trident (Siva)
cannot defeat him. O Emperor, thy son is well-versed in the true meaning
of all the Shastras (24). Knowing Keshava as Ishāna he did not engage in
fight with him. It is not that there is none who can defeat him (25).
Kālayavana is incapable of being slain by Keshava. With a view to have a
son the great Muni Gārgya adored Rudra for twelve years living on
powdered iron and practising dreadful and highly difficult penances.
Thereat pleased when Shankara offered him a boon Gārgya prayed for a son
whom the kings of Mathurā would not be able to slay. Rudra granted him
the boon, saying ’so be it’ (26-28). Thus by virtue of Rudra’s boon,
Gārgya’s son Kālayavana is unslayable by the kings of Mathura in the
battle-field and especially in the city of Mathurā (29). Though Krishna
is highly powerful amongst the princes of Mathura still if he comes to
battle and fights with him he will be able to defeat him (30). O kings,
if you accept my words as becoming and sound, send an emissary to the
capital of the king of Yavanas (33).

Vaishampāyana said:—Hearing the words of the highly powerful Shalya the
king of Soubha all the leading kings were delighted and said "We will do
it" (32). Hearing their words and recollecting those of Brahmā the
Emperor Jarāsandha lost heart and said (33).

Jarasandha said:—Alas! formerly, assailed by the fear of a foreign king,
all the Chiefs, seeking refuge with me, used to get back their lost
kingdoms, servants, army and conveyances (34). Now, on account of their
bad feelings towards their lord, they, like unto a damsel, coming in
contact with a stranger, are now exciting me to seek another’s shelter
(35). Alas! even when I, afraid of Krishna, am constrained to seek
refuge with another, Destiny alone is powerful. And by no means can any
one overcome it (36). O ye kings, it is better for me to die than to
seek helplessly the protection of another (king). I shall not therefore
seek refuge with any body else (37). I shall give him battle who has
been pointed out as my Death by the invisible words, may he be Krishna,
or Baladeva, or a man, or some one amongst the immortals (38). Even this
is my firm resolution and such is the conduct of a worthy person. I
shall not act against it seeking another’s protection (39). Even if you
be all well disposed he (Krishna) may destroy you all. For your
protection I shall send an envoy to him (40), O kings, the messenger
should so proceed by the etherial way that Krishna may not put in any
impediment. Do ye find out such a person who can go in this way (41).
This effulgent king of Soubha is gifted with the prowess of fire, the
sun and the moon. In a sunny car let him proceed to the capital of
Yavana (42). Let him approach the king of Yavanas as our envoy and
communicate to him our quarrel with Krishna. Let him try to bring him
over to this assemblage of Chiefs (43).

Vaishampāyana said:—Having thus expressed himself the Emperor Jarāsandha
again said to the powerful king of Soubha:—"Do thou depart, O giver of
honors and help all these Chiefs (44). Use such tactics that the king of
Yavanas may proceed and vanquish Krishna and we may be pleased" (45).

Having thus commanded all and worshipped Bhishmaka duly the Emperor,
encircled by his own army, set out for his city (46). Shalya, too, the
foremost of kings, having honored all duly, set out by the etherial way
in a car, coursing like air (47). Following Jarāsandha to some distance
the Deccan Chiefs repaired to their respective cities (48). Thinking of
his own evil conduct, of Krathā, Kaishika and Krishna, the king
Bhishmaka, along with his own son, entered into his Palace (49). On
account of the discomfiture of the kings consequent upon Krishna’s
arrival and the termination of the Swayamvara the chaste and wise
Rukshmini approached her friends and with her face bent down in shame
said:—"I tell you truly, I do not wish to be the spouse of any body else
save Krishna having lotus eyes" (50-51).