TITLE: CONVERSATION BETWEEN KRISHNA AND BHISHMAKA

Bhishmaka said:—"O Lord of gods, out of his childish nature, my son
wishes to give away his sister in a Swayamvara, but I do not like it
(1). He is entirely childish; I do not like to give away (my daughter in
this way). I wish that my daughter may select the only person whom she
sees (2). O Lord, I propitiate thee, for this my son’s bad conduct. Be
thou propitiated and forgive (him)" (3).

Krishna said:—"While your son, as a boy, has worked up all these kings,
I do not know how arrogant he will be when he will be advanced in years
(4). He who, born in a great royal family in this earth, speaks a
falsehood, even before one king, consumes with the fire of Yama’s
tortures: his own-self and all the regions effulgent like the rays of
the sun acquired by his asceticism (5–6). O Lord, I know this to be the
religious duty of the kings, and even Brahmā, in the days of yore,
pointed it out as the foremost duty of men (7). Under these
circumstances, O king, how can your son give utterance to a lie before
the kings in this assembly (8). Let it go, I doubt also very much your
statement that you do not know anything of the great assemblage of the
kings invited by your son (9). O king, you have offered hospitality and
welcome duly to the kings, assembled like the sun and moon; cars,
elephants, horses and the infantry have made a wild dance in your city,
and still you do not know anything of your son’s work. How may this be
(10-11)? I doubt very much, O king, how you were not able to know of the
arrival of four-fold forces though it might not have been a source of
anxiety (12). O king, perhaps thinking that my arrival was not conducive
to your well-being, you did not offer hospitality to such an unworthy
person (13). O you of large arms, why should you not give away your
daughter (in Swayamvara) for the very sin of my arrival here. Leaving me
aside, do you confer your daughter on a good husband (14). Manu and
other leading Law-givers have ordained that he who puts obstacles in the
way of a maiden, wastes himself in hell (15). O king, for this, I did
not enter into the assembly-hall and accept hospitality (16). O king,
when possessed greatly by bashfulness, I prayed for giving rest to my
followers in the city of Vidarbha, Kaishika, ever fond of guests,
offered us proper hospitality. I too, in the company of Garuda, am
living here as in the city of gods" (17–18).

Vaishampāyana said:—When Krishna, effulgent like burning fire, showered
these thunder-like words, king Bhishmaka, sprinkling him with sweet
words, consoled him (19).

Bhishmaka said:—"Be thou propitiated, O Lord of the celestial region. Do
thou forgive me, O Lord of the land of mortals. I am possessed by the
darkness of ignorance; do thou give me eyes of wisdom (20). We are men
of perverse understanding, gifted with fleshy eyes. Therefore whatever
we do without judging is not accomplished (21). However we have obtained
thee now who art the God of gods. May my vision grow wise and works be
accomplished (22). The wise, like great commanders, render fruitful
unaccomplished works by the discernment of moral laws (23). Having
obtained thy shelter, I do not entertain any fear. Listen to what I wish
to accomplish now (24). O king of gods, I do not wish to allow my
daughter to hold her Swayamvara lest she may choose another. Be thou
propitiated with me, O Lord of celestials. Do not be angry with me"
(25).

Krishna said:—"O king of great intelligence, O sinless one, I do not
perceive the utility of your sayings. Who can adjust whether you will
give away your daughter or not (26). O king, the goddess-like form of
Rukshmini has brought me to this place. But I should not say that you
should give her to me and not to anybody else (27). When in the days of
yore the gods assembled on the summit of the mount Sumeru for
incarnating their portions they said to her: ’O thou of spacious hip, do
thou with thy husband go to the world of men. And having been born in
the house of Bhishmaka in the city of Kundina, be thou united with
Keshava (28–29)’. I tell you this plainly, O king; do what ever you
think proper after due consideration (30). O king, truly your daughter
Rukshmini is not a woman; she is the very goddess Sree. For some object
and at the words of Brahmā she is born (as a woman) (31). She should not
be given away in a Swayamvara where all the kings will be assembled. She
must remain alone, and inviting one bride groom, you should confer her
on him. It will be thus performing a Kshatriya’s duties (32). O king,
you cannot give away Lakshmi in a Swayamvara. Selecting a good
bridegroom, you should give her away according to proper religious rites
(33). In order to put impediments in Swayamvara Vinata’s son has been
despatched by the king of gods and has come to the city of Kundina (34).
I too have come here to witness this Swayamvara festivity of the kings
and your daughter, the beautiful Kamala without lotuses (35). Your
saying before me ’Forgive me’ is considered by me as proper. And I do
not find any folly in it, O king (36). O lord, I have already been
pacified. Know me as conciliated since I have come to your territory in
a gentle form (37). O king, to cast off one’s shortcomings is
forgiveness and it is endued with many virtues. So, how can the mind of
one like myself be possessed by the sin of non-forgiveness (38). How can
sin, O king, be attached to you who are moral, truthful and born in a
family possessing the quality of goodness (39). Know me conciliated
particularly as I have come with my army, for with them I never confront
my enemies (40). When I cherish no forgiveness in my heart I go on the
back of my carrier, Garuda, the foremost of birds, with weapons
effulgent like the sun in my hand (41), O king, you are of the same age
with my father and are therefore adorable unto me like him. Behaving
with me, as a father treats his son, govern your kingdom well (42). How
can that sin, which resides in the heart of a coward, find room in the
heart of a pure-souled hero (43)? Know my conduct as pure as a father’s
feeling towards his son. Treating us with hospitality, these two kings
of Vidarbha have given us their kingdom. By the fruit of this gift their
ancestral manes of ten generations upwards have gone to the celestial
region (44-45) And ten succeeding generations too of their royal line
from son to grandson will also repair to the celestial region (46). And
they two, enjoying their kingdom for many long years, without any
thorns, will attain to emancipation when they will wish it (47). And
those noble kings, who were present at my _Abhisheka_, will in time
repair to the celestial region (40). O king, may you fare well! I shall
now with Vinatā’s son go to the charming city of Mathura protected by
the king Bhoja" (49).

Vaishampāyana said:—Saying this to the king Bhishmaka, welcoming all
other kings and issuing out of the Hall with Kratha and Kaishika, the
lords of Vidarbha, Krishna, the foremost of gods and Yadus, went to his
car (50). Beholding the departure of Keshava, the faces of the royal
saint Bhishmaka and of other kings were stricken with sorrow (51). At
that time beholding the prime and self-sprung Krishna, having eyes like
red lotuses, thousand feet, thousand eyes, thousand arms, thousand
lustrous crowns, thousand heads, adorned with celestial garlands,
raiments, scents, unguents and ornaments, holding uplifted celestial
weapons and having three eyes of the sun, moon and fire, the king
Bhishmaka bowed unto him and began to eulogise his glories, with his
body, mind and speech (52–55).

Bhishmaka said:—O God of gods, O Nārāyana, O Parāyana, thou hast no
origin or destruction. Thou art the eternal prime Deity, I bow unto thee
(56). Thou art the self-sprung Deity, art identical with the universe,
lotus navelled, hast clotted hairs, dost hold a staff and art of coppery
hue. I bow unto thee (57). Thou art Hansa, the discus, Vaikuntha, unborn
and the great Atman. I bow unto thee (58). Thou art Yogin, the existent
and non-existent, the ancient Purusha, the foremost of Purushas, above
three-fold qualities. I bow unto thee (59). O Lord, O foremost of the
celestials, that alone art the lord of all the worlds and the lord of
those who have acquired a know fledge of the soul. I am thy votary. Be
thou propitiated and confer on me a boon (60).

Vaishampāyana said:—Having thus chanted the glories of the great God
Krishna in the presence of the king, Bhishmaka made a present of
precious gems, pearls, and plates of Vaidurja unto him. Thereupon he
saluted in this way the highly powerful son of Vinatā too (61–62).

Bhishmaka said:—I bow unto that celestial bird, the son of Kashya endued
with the velocity of the wind who can assume various forms at will (63).

Vaishampāyana said:—Having thus chanted, in brief, the glories of
Vinatā’s son Bhismaka offered him various sorts of most excellent
raiment. After the lotus-eyed Krishna, the younger brother of Vāsava, on
taking leave, had departed all the kings followed him. Having thus
received honors, taken farewell of all the kings, placed Vinatā’s son
the foremost of birds, of a gentle form before him, been encircled by
huge cars, and lighted up all the quarters the energetic Krishna set out
for Mathurā. At that time there arose a great tumult consisting of the
sound of bugles, trumpets, conches, the hissing of the serpents, the
neighing of horses, and the rattle of the wheels of the cars resembling
the muttering of huge clouds.

After the departure of the highly powerful Krishna the gods repaired to
the celestial region with that assembly hall and the most excellent
seat. Encircled by their huge four-fold forces the kings followed
Janārddana, a distance of two miles and afterwards at his command
returned to Swayamvara (64–69).