TITLE: KANSA INVITES KRISHNA AND SENDS AKRURA TO BRING HIM

Vaishampayana said:—Hearing that Krishna was advancing in power like
fire in Vraja, Kansa, anticipating fear from him, was filled with
anxiety (1). On Putana being slain, the two trees being dragged by the
boy of no boy-like deeds, Kalya being vanquished, Dhenuka being killed,
Pralamva being discomfitted, the mount Govardhana being raised up,
Indra’s commandment being disregarded, the kine being protected by
enviable deeds and Kakudmi and Arishtha being destroyed the Gopas were
filled with delight. Beholding these highly terrible portends indicating
his impending death and these unthought of feats amongst his rising
enemies Mathura’s king Kansa considered himself as brought under the
influence of death. And his organs and mind being deprived of
consciousness he appeared like one dead (2-6). Thereupon in the
noiseless dead of night, Mathura’s king Kansa, the son of Ugrasena of
fierce commands, summoned his father and kinsmen to his city (7).
Summoning god-like Vasudeva, Kangka, Satyaka, Dāruka, Kanka’s youngest
brother, Bhoja, Vaitarana, the highly powerful Vikadru, the king
Bhayesakha, Viprithu of great prosperity, the liberal Kritavarma, the
highly energetic and bold Bhurishravā and various other descendants of
Yadu race and welcoming them all in due order he said:—"Listen, O ye
Yādavas, ye are all business-like, devoted to the Vedas, expert in
ascertaining the proper rules of conduct, the introducers of the three
Vargas²⁴⁵, ever observant of your duties, like gods in this world, and
ever wending the good ways and firm as the mountains (8-13). Ye are all
shorn of haughtiness and you have all lived properly in the families of
your preceptors²⁴⁶, ye are all therefore proficient in archery and
capable of holding royal counsels (14). Besides ye are all like lamps of
glory in all these worlds, conversant with the real purport of the
Vedas, the true import of the Ashramas (conditions of life), with the
order of Varnas (castes), the propounder of the beautiful rules of
conduct, the leaders of the givers of laws, the conquerors of foreign
kingdoms, and the protectors of those seeking refuge with you (15–16).
You are all so very vivacious in your conversation and endued with such
an unimpeachable character, what to speak of the earth even the
celestial region may feel itself honored (by your presence) (17). Your
conduct resembles that of the Rishis, your power is like that of the
Maruts, your anger is like that of Rudras and your effulgence is like
that of the fire (18). As the earth is supported by the mountains so the
decaying race of Yadus is upheld by you all, heroes of far-famed glory
(19) You all follow my will, why then are you at present disregarding
the rising calamity of mine, (20)? Like unto a rising a cloud, Nanda
Gopa’s son, the celebrated Krishna of Vraja is about to strike at the
root (of the race) (21). I have lost my heart and four eyes and I have
no able ministers. And therefore that boy was kept secretly in Nanda
Gopa’s house (22). Like a malady disregarded, the swelling ocean and the
roaring clouds of the rainy season that wicked-minded one is rising in
power (23). I have not been able to find out the means of subduing or to
understand the movements of that boy of wonderful deeds born in Nanda
Gopa’s house (24). That boy is either the offspring of a god or born of
any other powerful being. I however do not know any thing—but I surmise
so by his superhuman deeds which even the celestials can not perform
(25). While asleep in his infancy he drank up the life of Putanā (going
there in the form of a) bird under the pretext of sucking her breast
(26). Vanquished in no time in the lake of Yamuna, that Nāga Kalya,
ranging in the region underneath, has disappeared (27). But Nanda’s son,
by his Yoga power, has risen up again. Dropped down from the top of a
palm tree Dhenuka has breathed his last (28). Pralamva too, whom even
the gods could not surpass in battle, has been slain like an ordinary
animal, by that powerful one with the strokes of his fist (29).
Suppressing the festivity in honor of Indra, and putting a stop to
excessive rain consequent upon his anger that boy held up the mount
Govardhana for affording shelter to the kine (30). The powerful Aristha,
with his horns shattered, has been slain by him in Vraja. From the
actions of that boy living in the village of milk-men it appears that he
is not a boy, but assuming the false guise of a child, is sporting there
merely. While he stands before me for a battle, forsooth, I know that he
is my Death—(the destroyer) of my former body (31–33). There is a vast
difference between the birth as a wretched milkman amongst men, weak for
their death and his sporting in my cow-settlement with the power of a
god (34). It appears to me as certain that a god, covering his own true
form with a Gopa body, is sporting here like fire in the cremation
ground (35). I have heard that in the days of yore in order to
accomplish the work of the celestials, Vishnu, assuming the form of a
dwarf, took away the earth from Bali (36). At another time assuming the
form of a lion that powerful Vishnu killed Hiranyakashipu the
grand-father of the Dānavas (37). Assuming a form, surpassing the range
of thought, Bhāva (Siva) the destroyer of Tripura killed all the Daityas
on the Sweta mountain (38). Being shaken off his promise²⁴⁷ by his
preceptor Angira’s son (Kacha) resorting to a frog’s illusion²⁴⁸
Bhrigu’s son (Sukra) caused a drought (in the land of the Dānavas) (39).
Assuming the form of a boar that thousand-headed eternal deity Vishnu
raised up the earth from the great ocean (40). When the gods and Asuras,
assembled for (churning) for ambrosia, Vishnu, in the shape of a
tortoise in the ocean, held up the Mandara mountain (41). And when there
arose ambrosia he, assuming the form of a beautiful woman, created a
highly terrible battle between the gods and demons (42). Assuming a
wretched dwarf form in the days of yore he rescued the three worlds
including the land of the celestials, with his three foot-steps from
Bali (43). It was he, who having divided himself into four portions and
taking his birth as Rāma in Dasharatha’s house, killed Ravana (44). For
accomplishing the work of gods Vishnu assumes various forms and
deceitfully does his own work (45). Forsooth Vishnu, of whom Nārada
spoke to me, or Sakra, the king of gods, has now come for bringing about
my death (46). In this matter our fear proceeds from Vasudeva; this is
even my firm conviction. By his sense we have been reduced to this
strait (47). When I met Nārada again in Khatwānga forest that Brāhmana
said to me "O Kansa, Vasudeva, in the night, has baffled your great care
regarding Devaki’s child (48–49). The daughter, whom you dashed against
a stone in that night, is Yashodā’s daughter and know Krishna as
Vasudeva’s son (50). Vasudeva, your enemy in the guise of a friend,
after due consultation, exchanged the children in night for bringing
about your death (51). Having slain on the Vindhya mountain the two
sky-ranging Dānavas, Shumbha and Nisumbha, that daughter of Yashoda,
sprinkled by the gods, is being worshipped by the dreadful robbers and
various animals. She is fond of human and animal sacrifices and confers
boon (upon her worshippers) after their hearts (52–53). Embellished with
two jars full of wine and blood and adorned with peacock-feathers she
has made her own abode, by her own power, in the forest of the Vindhya
range. It is filled with cries of proud cocks and crows, abounds in free
birds and deer, echoes with the roars of lions, tigers and boars, is
thick with trees and covered entirely with woods. The temple is filled
with golden vases, chowries, mirrors and is resonant with the sound of
thousands of trumpets. The beautiful goddess, the mother of fear unto
the enemies, daily lives there with great delight and even the
celestials adore her. Nārada has said that the boy who is known as the
son of Nanda Gopa, Krishna, will be the agent of many important deeds.
The second son that will be born of Vasudeva and pass by the name of
Vāsudeva, that kinsman of yours will easily put you to death. He is
Vasudeva, the powerful son of Vasudeva. Morally he is my kins-man, but
at heart a dreadful enemy (54–61). As a crow, with its beaks fond of
flesh, distresses the eyes of a man on whose head it sets its foot, so
this Vasudeva, brought up by me in my house, along with his son, kinsmen
and fruits, is trying to strike at the root of my family (62–63). A man,
after killing an embryo or a cow or a woman, can somehow save himself,
but there is no region for an ungrateful person (64). An ungrateful man,
who for a selfish end, gives vent to sweet words which prove dangerous
in the long run, wends the way of out-castes (65). He, who having his
mind bent on iniquity, injures an innocent man, is constrained to wend
the way leading to hell (66). On account of our rules of conduct and
accomplishments, we are worthy of praise to persons like you seeking
friendship. And such sons are more worthy of praise (67). As by the
dreadful fight of the elephants, trees are destroyed which, after the
close of the combat, become their food, so when dissensions take place
amongst kinsmen, either relatives or inferior arbitrators meet with
destruction (68–69). Vasudeva, while you are about to sow dissensions in
this family, I now understand forsooth that without knowing you I fed
you who are like death (70). O foolish man, you are always angry by
nature, fond of creating enemies, sinful and of false humility. It is
you who have brought this Yadu race into a pitiable strait (71). O
Vasudeva, your old age is of no use. Unknowingly did I reward you who,
in his hundred years with all his hairs grey, do not become old (72)? He
is aged in this world whose sense is ripe. But he is not aged whose
hairs are grey (73). You are of a harsh temper; your intellect is not
ripe and you are merely old in age like an autumnal cloud (74). O vain
Vasudeva, you have thought. ’On Kansa being slain my son will govern
Mathura’ (75). Your hope is already frustrated, O you who have uselessly
grown old and your resolution is falsified. No, one who has the desire
of living, will live before me (76). By this wicked mind you have
thought of injuring me who have confided in you; I will take steps
against it in the presence of your two sons (77). I have never killed an
old man, a Brāhmana, a woman, or any one specially amongst my kinsmen,
and I shall never do it (78). You are born here and have been brought up
by my father. Besides you are my sister’s husband and the first
preceptor of the Yadus (79). Born in the great family of the well-known
Lords Paramount of the world you are being worshipped as a preceptor by
the noble and religious Yādavas (80). Old man, what shall we do? For
such a conduct of a leading Yadava like your self, all the members of
the Yadu race have become the butt of peoples’ talk (81). O Vasudeva, if
I am dead or defeated, for your improper conduct, it will put the
Yadavas to shame before the pious (82). By concerting this measure for
my destruction you have made yourself an object of distrust and the
Yādavas of redicule (83). What more, you have created such an enmity
between me and Krishna that there will be no peace in the Yadu family
unless one of us dies (84).

"Whatever it may be, O giver of gifts, go to Vraja, at my command and
bring these two boys, Nanda and other Gopas who pay tributes to me (85).
Tell Nanda to come quickly to Mathura with his annual tribute along with
other milk-men (86). Kansa, surrounded by his servants and priests,
wants to see Krishna and Sangkarshana, the two sons of Vasudeva (87). He
has heard that, that both of them are of hard limbs, powerful, careful,
clever in fighting and well up in holding a match in the arena (83).
Well-armed the two wrestlers of mine are rejoicing to combat with them.
They are also experts in fighting and will match them (89). Besides
these two boys, ranging in the woods of Vraja, the two immortal-like
best of warriors are my sister’s sons and therefore I should see them
(90). Tell the inhabitants of Vraja that the king, of his own accord, is
celebrating a bow festivity (91). Therefore let them come with necessary
milk, curd, butter, &c., to cater the invited persons after their hearts
and live at ease in the forest attached to the city. (62–93). O Akrura,
I am filled with curiosity to see Krishna and Sangkarshena. Do you go
soon, bring them here and satisfy my command (94). If they come here I
shall attain to supreme delight. Beholding those two highly powerful
boys I shall engage in a work conducive to my well-being (95). If they
do not come here at my behest I shall subdue them in time (96). O
Akrura, it is better to use conciliatory words first towards the boys.
Do you soon bring them here with sweet words (97). O you of firm vows,
if you are not alienated from me by Vasudeva, do you accomplish this
great work conducive to my pleasure (98). Do that by which they may come
here."

Thus villified, Vasudeva, resembling a Vasu, resorting to gravity and
patience, stood there motionless like an ocean (99). Assailed by foolish
Kansa, with these shaft-like words, he, resorting to forgiveness, did
not give any reply (100). Those, who saw him thus insulted at that time,
all exclaimed, bending low their heads, "Oh fie Oh fie!" (101). With his
celestial vision the liberal Akrura could know everything. And so he was
filled with great delight like a thirsty man on seeing water. And in
order to see the lotus-eyed Krishna he left Mathura in that very moment
(102-103).

²⁴⁵ The three-fold objects of life, namely, Dharma, Artha and Kama.

²⁴⁶ It was the practice in ancient India that the kings used to send
 their sons to their preceptors to recieve proper instructions.
 These princes lived in the family of their preceptors.

²⁴⁷ Sukra promised not to consign the _mantras_ of reviving a dead man
 to any body but this promise was falsified.

²⁴⁸ As a frog revives as soon as he is dead so Kacha rose up many
 times alive after his death. The allusion, contained in this
 chapter, is as follows:—Vrihaspati (Angirasa) was the priest of
 the gods and Sukra that of the Danavas. There was a rivalry
 between these two Brāhmanas. Sukra knew the _mantra_ of reviving a
 dead man with which he revived many Daityas. Vrihaspati did not
 know it. Thereat Kacha, the eldest son of Vrihaspati, was sent to
 Sukra to learn it. Kacha became his disciple and began to please
 him and his daughter Devajani. By and by he exercised a great
 influence on Sukra’s daughter who was greatly attached to him. One
 day while Kacha was tending kine the Danavas, learning that he was
 the son of Vrihaspati, hacked him into pieces, which were eaten up
 wolves. Devajani grew mad after him and pressed her father to
 revive him which Sukra did. Next time he was burnt to ashes and
 they were mixed up with liquor which Sukra drank up. Devajani
 again wanted her father to revive Kacha; this was a question of
 life, and death to him. He therefore taught Kacha the mantra first
 who came out of his womb and then revived again Sukra. Thus did
 Kacha learn the art of reviving a dead man. See Mahabharata,
 chapters LXXV and VI, Adiparva.