TITLE: BATTLE WITH SHRIGALA

Vaishampayana said:—Being informed of their arrival and thinking that
they would attack the city, king Shrigāla, terrible in battle and endued
with the prowess of Indra, issued (out of the city) (1). Mounting a car
filled with weapons, having the clatter of its axles for its smiles,
adorned with variegated ornaments, filled with inexhaustible arrows and
quivers, making a sound like that of the ocean, drawn by quick-coursing
horses, embellished with strong golden axles, coursing like Garuda,
governed by reins resembling the rays of the sun, effulgent like the sun
and resembling the car of Indra he issued out of the city (2-6). In that
foremost of cars capable of striking the chariots of the enemies
Shrigāla approached Krishna like an insect approaching a flame (7).
Bedecked with sharpened arrows, coats of mail, golden garlands, a white
cloth and an Ushnisha (turban) the king Shrigāla, with a bow in his hand
and having fiery eyes, began again and again to whirl his bow endued
with the qualities of a lightning. And vomitting air begotten by anger,
and effulgent like the flames of fire and burning in the lustre of his
ornaments he was seen on the car like Sumeru the foremost of mountains
(8-10). Stricken with fear at his shouts and the clatter of his
car-wheels the Earth sank under his weight (11). Beholding the beautiful
Shrigala approach like unto a patriarch and the incarnation of a
mountain Vāsudeva was not pained (12). Gradually under the influence of
ire Shrigāla, desirous of fighting, approached Vāsudeva by the help of a
quick-coursing car (13). When beholding Vāsudeva seated at ease,
Shrigāla ran towards him like unto clouds ranging towards a mountain.
Vāsudeva, smiling a little, addressed himself too for giving him a
return battle. Thereupon there took place a dreadful encounter between
them like that of two infuriated elephants in a forest (14–15). Out of
ignorance, the energetic Shrigāla, fond of war and proud of his
position, said to Krishna who was present for battle (16).

"O Krishna, I have heard of thy work in the weak army of the stupid
kings on the mount Gomanta who had no leader. I have heard too of the
defeat of the useless Kshatriyas inexperienced in war and worthy of pity
(17–18). However I am now stationed in the dignity of the emperor of the
world, do thou wait before me. Thou art not expert in the art of war.
Surely wilt thou fly away when I will obstruct thee (19). Thou art alone
and I am with my army; so I should not fight with thee in this way.
Come, I shall alone fight with thee; what is the use of other inferior
men? We shall both engage in fight and one of us will meet with his
death in a fair fight (20–21). If thou art slain, O Krishna, I shall be
the only Vāsudeva in the world. And if I am slain thou shalt be the only
one (22)."

Hearing those words of Shrigala and saying "Strike me as you wish" the
forgiving Mādhava held up his discus (23). Thereupon losing his sense in
anger in the battle field Shrigāla, of limited prowess, discharged a net
of arrows at Krishna (24). The powerful Shrigāla showered on Krishna
mace and various other weapons. And albeit ruthlessly assailed with
weapons covered with flames of fire Krishna stood there motionless like
a mountain (25–26). Thus attacked again and again he was filled with
wrath. And holding up his discus he hurled it at Shrigala’s breast (27).
Having slain the highly powerful Shrigāla, fearful in battle, of growing
pride and ever observant of Kshatriya duties, the discus Sudarshana
returned to its preceptor’s hand. Shrigala too, having his heart pierced
by the discus, shorn of life and joy, fell down, bleeding like a cleft
mountain (28-29). Beholding the king fallen like a mountain struck down
by a thunder-bolt his soldiers lost heart and fled away, on the death of
their king (30). Some, assailed by grief consequent upon the death of
their lord and greatly stricken with sorrow, entered into the city and
began to weep there (31). Some, not being able to forsake their fallen
king and performing auspicious rites, began to bewail there with their
hearts laden with grief (32).

Thereupon declaring safety unto the people assembled there with his
fingers adorned with a discus having silvery handles, the lotus-eyed
Krishna, the slayer of his enemies, said with a voice like the rumbling
of clouds. "Do not fear! Do not fear (33–34)." Thus consoled by Krishna,
and beholding their king, with his breast wounded, fallen on earth like
a mountain with its summits struck down Shrigāla’s subjects and
ministers began to shed tears poorly and were filled with sorrow like
his son (35-38). Hearing their cries and the hoarse noise of the
citizens Shrigāla’s queens, with their sons, came out weeping from the
city (39). Arriving at the battle-field and beholding their worthy royal
husband fallen in that plight they, striking their breasts with their
hands, began to weep plaintively (40). Striking their breasts and
tearing ruthlessly their curling hairs those women began to weep in a
hoarse voice. And stricken with terrible grief and with their eyes full
of tears they fell down on their husband’s body like uprooted and
roughly handled creepers (41–42). The eyes of the queens, full of tears,
shone like lotuses divorced from water (43). Beholding their husband
thus fallen, striking their breast and speaking of his actions they
began to bewail plaintively (44).

Thereupon taking their weeping boy by name Shakradeva, to their
husband’s side, the the ladies, crying aloud with doubled force, said
(45):—"O hero, although endued with prowess, this thy boy son has not
been able to acquire mastery over the art of administration. Without
thee how will he be able to attain to the dignity of his father (46)? O
lord, we are not satiated with enjoying in thy company. How dost thou
leave us all behind simultaneously What shall we all do, widows as we
are (47)?"

Thereupon weeping and taking her son with her Shrigāla’s beautiful queen
Padmāvati approached Vāsudeva and said (48):—"This is the son of the
king, whom, O hero, thou hast slain by thy war-like deeds. He seeks thy
shelter (49). If his father had bowed unto thee and carried out thy
mandate he would not have been thus assailed with one single stroke
(50). If this wicked king had contracted friendship with thee, he would
not have, with his life gone, taken shelter on the surface of the earth
(51). O hero, O sinless Krishna, do thou protect, like thy own son, this
son of thy dead friend, the perpetuator of his race (52)."

Hearing the words of Shrigālā’s queen Krishna, of the Yadu race, the
foremost of speakers, said to her mildly (53):—"O queen, our anger is
gone with this vicious-souled one. We have regained our temper and we
are his friends (54). With your gracious words, O chaste lady, my anger
has been appeased; undoubtedly this son of Shrigāla is just like mine
(55). I declare safety unto them and gladly annoint him as the king.
Inviting the priest, the ministers and the subjects do thou place him on
his ancestral throne."

Thereupon in order to perform the ceremony of installation, all the
subjects, priests and ministers appeared before Rāma and Keshava.
Placing the prince on the throne the powerful Janārddana sprinkled him
with celestial water. Having installed Shrigāla’s son in the city of
Karavira Krishana desired to go away on the very day (56-59). Mounting
on a car drawn by horses acquired in battle Krishna went away like
Vāsava entering into the city of the celestials (60). Placing Shrigala,
terrible in battle, on a conveyance, and going to a distance in the
western quarters the pious-souled Sakradeva, the repressor of his
enemies, along with his mother, and subjects, headed by boys, aged
people and youthful damsels, performed the obsequial rites of his father
according to the ordinances (61–63). Thereupon reciting the name of the
deceased king he offered oblation of water in his favour and thousands
of other funeral presents (64). Having his mind thus worked up with
sorrow consequent upon the death of his father and performed his watery
ceremony the king Sakradeva entered into his own city (65).