TITLE: THE EARTH GOES TO BRAHMA: MARKANDEYA EXPLAINS HOW

BRAHMA, VISHNU, SIVA ARE ONE.

Vaishampāyana said:—When the three eyes (of Siva) were burning all the
worlds were covered with darkness: and Nandi, Rudra and his car were not
visible (1). Then Rudra, burning in double effulgence on account of his
anger and strength, took up his arrow having sharpened darts on four
sides with which he had killed Tripura. When the three-eyed deity took
up that arrow, set it to his bow and was about to discharge it the
high-souled Vāsudeva, cognizant of the minds of all, came to know of it.
Thereupon the quick-handed and highly powerful Purusottama took up his
weapon Jrimbhana (yawning) and made with it Hara yawn. With that arrow
the Divine Hara, the conqueror of Asuras and Rakshasas, was stupified
together with his bow and arrows and lost consciousness. Having
stupified with his weapon his own self in the shape of Rudra together
with his bow and arrows the highly powerful Krishna, identical with all,
blew his conch-shell. Seeing Shankara stupified and hearing the blare of
his conch-shell Pānchajanya and the twang of of his bow Shrānga all the
creatures were filled with fear. In the meantime Rudra’s followers
arrived at the battle-field and resorting to an illusory fight attacked
Pradyumna. The highly powerful and energetic Makaraketana however made
them all asleep and with his arrows began to kill the Dānavas who had
innumerable Pramathas amongst them (2–10). While Rudra, of unwearied
actions, yawned a flame came out of his mouth and consumed the ten
quarters. At that time assailed by those powerful armies the goddess
Earth, trembling, approached the great Brahmā and said "O thou of large
arms, O great god, I have been assailed with great energies. I have been
so much loaded with the weight of Rudra and Kesheva that I will again be
reduced to one all-extending ocean. O grand-father, do you think of this
unbearable burden of mine. Do thou find out some means, by which
released of my burden I may uphold the mobile and immobile creations"
(11-15).

Vaishampāyana said:—Hearing it the grand-father said to the daughter of
Kashyapa:—"Sustain yourself for a moment and you will be released of
your burden." Thereupon the Lord Brahmā said to Rudra:—"Thou didst find
out the means of slaying this great Asura: why dost thou then wish to
protect him? O thou of large arms, I do not like that thou shouldst
engage in an encounter with Krishna. Dost thou not know that Krishna is
thy second body." Hearing the words of Brahmā the eternal Lord, having
three eyes, concentrated his mind on the Brahman (soul) within him and
saw the three worlds consisting of mobile and immobile creations.
Beholding himself stupified along with his bow and arrow the great Yogin
Bhava, by virtue of his mental concentration, thought of the boon he had
conferred and of what he had said at Dwārakā: he therefore made no
reply. Seeing him in Krishna and them both in one (Brahman) he was
pacified and left the battle-field. Rudra said to Brahmā:—"O lord, I
will not fight any more. By this encounter of Krishna and Vāna the earth
will be relieved of her burden" (16–21). Thereupon with great pleasure
Krishna and Rudra retired from the battle-field and embraced one another
(22). When those two great Yogins were united no body could see them.
Having brought out the reconciliation between Hara and Hari and himself
only seeing them Brahmā, the creator of all, said to the Rishis Nārada
and Mārkandeya who were by his side and who had questioned that
far-sighted deity:—"In a dream in the night I saw Bhava and Keshava in
the lake near the mount Mandara (22–25). Here I saw Hara in Hari’s form
and Hari in Hara’s. Hara had conch-shell, discus and club in his hands,
was clad in a yellow raiment and rode Garuda. Hari had trident and
Pattica in his hand, was clad in a tiger-skin and rode a bull. Seeing
that highly wonderful scene I am filled with surprise. O Mārkendeya, do
thou describe unto me the truth" (26–28).

Markendeya said:—Shiva is identical with Vishnu and Vishnu is identical
with Shiva. I do not see any difference. They are both auspicious,
without beginning, middle or end, eternal and undecaying. Hear I will
describe that form identical with Hari and Hara (29–30). He is Vishnu
who is Rudra; and he is Rudra who is Brahmā. Brahmā, Vishnu and Rudra
are one and of the same form. Three of them are great ascetics, Lords of
half-females, self-sprung, givers of boons and masters of the universe.
As water is mixed with water when it is thrown into it so Vishnu becomes
at one with Rudra, when he enters into him. As fire becomes fire when it
is mixed with it so Rudra becomes identical with Vishnu when he enters
into him. Rudra is identical with fire and Vishnu is identical with the
moon. This universe, consisting of mobile and immobile creations, is
identical with the protector of what is mobile and immobile in this
universe. And Maheswara is their destroyer. The Lord Narayana, identical
with past, present and future and Maheswara are the primary causes of
Hiranyagarbha and the great principles. They both are the givers of the
Vedas. They are the creator and the protector of the universe. They send
down rain in the shape of Indra and spread rays in the shape of the sun.
They blow in the shape of the wind and create all. Thus O Grand-father,
I have described to you the great secret. The man, who daily reads or
hears this account, attains to that most excellent region created by the
power of Vishnu and Rudra (29–39). With Brahmā, Hari and Hara are the
Creator, Preserver and Destroyer of the universe. I will now chant their
glories. Vishnu is adorable unto Rudra, and Rudra is adorable unto
Vishnu. They are one, still they range in the world under two forms.
Vishnu is not different from Shankara and Shankara is not different from
Vishnu. Therefore formerly Rudra and Upendra became one. Salutation unto
Rudra and Krishna of one united body (40-42). Salutation unto the
three-eyed deity, salutation unto the two-eyed deity, salutation unto
coppery-eyed (Kumara) and lotus-eyed (Pradyumna) (43). Salutation unto
the holder of the earth, of the holder of peacock-feathers and of
Keyura. Salutation unto him adorned with a garland of skulls, him
adorned with a garland of wild flowers, him the holder of trident and
him the holder of discus, unto the standard of gold and Brahmā (44–46).
Salutation unto him clad in skin and salutation unto him clad in a
yellow raiment. Salutation unto the Lord of Lakshmi and unto the Lord of
Umā (47). Salutation unto the holder of trident and unto him of mace.
Salutation unto him whose body is covered with ashes and unto him who is
dark-blue hued. Salutation unto him who lives in the cremation ground
and unto him who lives in an Ashrama. Salutation unto the rider of a
bull and unto the rider of Garuda. Salutation unto him who has more than
one form, unto him who has many forms, unto the Lord of destruction and
unto him who lies on the ocean. Salutation unto him who has many forms
and unto him who is Bhairava (49–50).