TITLE: SUPERHUMAN DEEDS OF KRISHNA. HE UPSETS A CARRIAGE AND KILLS

PUTANA.

Vaishampayana said:—Without showing himself properly the Lord spent a
considerable time as a milk-man in the village of Nanda (1). Of those
two boys the eldest was named Sangkarshana and the youngest Krishna.
They grew up there most happily (2). Incarnating himself as Krishna the
Lord Hari, assuming the dark-blue hue of the cloud, grew up there in the
midst of milk-men like a cloud in the ocean (3).

One day while Krishna fell asleep under a carriage, Yashoda, fond of her
sons, went to the river Yamunā leaving him there (4). Thereupon to sport
there like a child Krishna began to cry and throw up his arms. Then
raising up his legs he overturned the carriage with one of them. And
then crawling on his legs he began to cry for milk (5–6). In the
meantime, Yashodā, having finished her bath and her person wetted with
the milk of her breast like a milch cow, when its calf is tied, came
there with her mind stricken with fear (7). She saw there the carriage
over turned without any wind. And then crying aloud she speedily took up
her child (8). She could not truly make out how the carriage was
overturned; and then filled with fear she said to her boy (9) "O my
child, your father is highly wrathful. I do not know what he will say
when he will come to know of your sleeping under the carriage and of its
being overturned (10). What is the use of my bathing? What business had
I to go to go the river. On account of this foolish act of mine I saw
you under the overturned carriage (11)."

Clad in a silken raiment Nanda had gone to the forest to tend his kine.
When he returned to his own house in Vraja he saw the carriage upset.
Its two wheels were raised up. The axles, the pitcher and the rod were
all broken (12-13) Seeing this he was greatly terrified and coming
quickly with eyes full of tears he repeatedly asked "Is my son all
right?" (14). When he saw his son sucking the breast of Yashodā he was
relieved of his anxiety and asked how the carriage was upset without the
fighting of the bulls (15). Terrified and with a suppressed voice
Yashoda replied: "O gentle one, I do not know who has upset this
carriage. I had been to the river to wash my cloth. When I came back I
saw it overturned (16–17)".

While they were thus talking, the boys, who were present there,
said:—"When we came here of our own accord we saw this boy upsetting the
carriage with his feet". Hearing this the milkman Nanda was filled with
great surprise (18–19). Pleased and terrified he began to think how
could this be. The other milkmen, having the ordinary intelligence of
men, placed no confidence in the words of the boys (20). Filled with
wonder and having their eyes expanded accordingly they replaced the
carriage and tied its wheels (21).

Vaishampayana said:—Once on a time in the mid-night, Kansa’s nurse, the
dreadful Putanā, creating the fear of life, went in the shape of a bird,
capable of assuming forms at will, to village of milkmen, shaking her
wings (22–23). Entering, in the mid-night, into Vraja, roaring like a
tiger, Putanā assumed the form of a woman. And having her breast pressed
by milk she lay down under the wheel of the carriage. When all the
inhabitants of Vraja fell asleep she began to give milk to Krishna
(24–25). Thereupon drink ing up all her vital breaths together with her
milk Krishna set up a terrible sound. She too, having her breast
sundered, fell down earth (26). At that sound, Nanda, other milk-men and
Yashodā awoke. And they were all beside themselves with fear (27). They
saw there Putanā lying down on the ground, bereft of her consciousness
and breast, as if she had been crushed down by a thunder-bolt (23).
Exclaiming "What is this? Who has done it?" all the milkmen headed by
Nanda stood around her (29). They however could not, by any means, find
out the cause. Exclaiming repeatedly "Wonder! Wonder!" they went to
their own houses (30). After the milkmen had gone away to their
respective homes filled with wonder, Nanda respectfully said to
Yashodā:—"O timid lady, I have been struck with great wonder and have
not been able to trace out its cause. What ever it may be, I am really
afraid. Is there any danger for my son (31–42)?"

Yashoda, too, stricken with fear, replied:—"O reverend Sir, I was asleep
with my son and was roused up by this terrible sound. So I do not know
what took place before" (33). Hearing the reply of Yashodā, Nanda,
together with his friends, was filled with surprise and anticipated fear
from Kansa (34).