TITLE: THE DESTRUCTION OF VAJRANABHA: AN ACCOUNT OF

PRABHAVATI.

Janamejaya said:—O Muni, O thou the foremost of the pious, I have
listened to an account of the stealing away of Bhānumati, the conquest
of Keshava, the bringing of Chlālikya from the celestial region, and the
god-like sport of the Vrishnis of incomparable energy in the ocean and
many other wonderful subjects. While describing the destruction of
Nikumbha you have mentioned that of Vajranābha. O Muni, I am now curious
to hear this (1–3).

Vaishampāyana said:—O great king, O descendant of Bharata, hear, I shall
now describe the destruction of Vajra nābha with an account of the
victories of Kāma and Shāmva (4), O victor of armies, a great Asura,
celebrated by the name of Vajranābha, practised hard austerities on the
summit of the mount Sumeru. Pleased with his penances the Divine Brahmā,
the grand-father of the world, asked him to pray for a boon (5–6). O
king Janamejaya, thereat, that foremost of Dānavas prayed for two boons
that even the gods might not kill him, and that he might get the city
Vajra where even the air cannot easily enter, which gives every sort of
desired-for objects even when they are not thought of, which has gardens
encircled by walls, many branch cities, and peerless jems of every
description (7–9). By that boon he got what he wanted and the great
Asura Vajranābha lived in the city of Vajra (10). O king, seeking refuge
with that great Asura who had obtained this boon, millions of demons
lived in that city of Vajra, in his garden and in many charming branch
cities. O king, the enemies of the gods lived there, healthy, well-fed
and contented (11-12). Once on a time, elated with the pride of the boon
given in his favour and that of his city the wicked Vajranābha got
himself ready to impede the course of the world. O king, approaching the
king of gods he said "O slayer of Pāka, all the three worlds are the
common properties of all the high-souled sons of Kashyapa. I therefore
wish to govern the three worlds. If you, O king of gods, do not approve
of my proposal, give me battle" (13-15).

O descendant of Kuru, hearing the words of Vajranābha, Mahendra, the
foremost of celestials, consulted with Vrihaspati and said:—"O gentle
one, our father, the ascetic Kashyapa, is now engaged in a sacrifice.
After its termination he will do what is fair" (16–17).

Thereupon the Dānava went to his father Kashyapa and expressed his
desire. Kashyapa said what the king of gods had communicated (18). "O
son, go now to the city of Vajra and live there controlling yourself.
After the termination of the Yajna I will do what is fair" (19). Thus
addressed Vajranābha returned to his own city.

Thereupon Mahendra went to the city of Dwāravati having many doors and
communicated secretly to Vāsudeva what Vajranābha had said. Thereat
Janārddana said "O Vāsava, the horse-sacrifice of Vasudeva is now at
hand. After its termination I will kill Vajranabha (20–22). O lord, O
refuge of the pious, even the wind cannot enter into his city if
Vajranābha does not wish it. At a convenient hour we will concert
measures for entering there" (23).

O descendant of Bharata, honored by Vāsudeva’s son in his
horse-sacrifice the king of gods set out (24). Even before the
termination of Vasudeva’s sacrifice the heroic Vāsava and Keshava, the
foremost of celestials, began to think of means for entering into the
city of Vajra (25).

During the celebration of Vasudeva’s sacrifice an actor, by name Bhadra,
pleased the great saints with his beautiful acting. The leading Munis
then asked him to pray for a boon. Thereupon saluting those best of
Munis assembled in the horse-sacrifice, the actor Bhadra, resembling the
king of gods himself, as desired by Krishna and as if urged on by the
goddess of learning, prayed for the following boon (26-28).

The actor said:—"O foremost of Munis, may I become the food of all the
twice-born ones: may I range over the earth consisting of seven insular
continents: may I, without any obstruction, range all over the sky: may
I be gifted with strength and be not slain by all creatures mobile and
immobile. May I assume any form I like either of one born, dead or
immediately born. May not decrepitude overtake me and may the Munis
always remain pleased with me" (29–32).

O king, the Munis said "So be it." That immortal-like one began to range
all over the earth consisting of seven insular continents. He began to
show his performances in the cities of the Dānava kings, in Uttarakura,
Bhadrāshwa, Ketumāl and the island of Kalāmra. On the occasion of every
Parva, that great actor, who had obtained the boon, used to come to
Dwarakā adorned with the Yadavas (33–35).

Thereupon, one day, the Divine Sakra, the king of gods, said to
Dhārtarāshtra swans:–"O celestial birds, although you are the carriers
of the gods and the pious, still you are our brothers on account of your
being begotten by Kashyapa (36–37). Now the great duty of killing the
enemies of the gods awaits us. You should satisfy it. But take care,
don’t divulge the counsel (38). If you do not obey the commands of the
gods you will meet with a hard punishment. O foremost of swans, you can
go anywhere you like (39). Therefore going to the most excellent city of
Vajranabha where no one else can enter you should range in the tanks of
his inner appartment (40). Vajranābha has a jewel of a daughter,
peerless in beauty, in the three worlds, by name Prabhāvati who is fair
like the rays of the moon (41). I have heard that her mother has
obtained that beautiful daughter by virtue of the boon conferred by the
goddess Haimavati (42). O Swans, her friends have kept that beautiful
and chaste maiden for _Swayemvara_ and she too will select a husband of
her own accord. Do you describe to her the various accomplishments,
family, beauty, character, and age, of the high-souled Pradyumna
(43-44). When you will find that the chaste daughter of Vajranābha has
felt some attachment for Pradyumna, take carefully her news to Pradyumna
and return with his message to her. In this work of an emissary you
should, according to your intelligence, govern your eyes and faces. You
should thus do me a good turn now (45–47). O swans, what more shall I
speak, you should describe all these accomplishments of Pradyumna to
her, which will likely attract Prabhāvati’s mind; you should communicate
to me and to my younger brother Krishna at Dwāravati daily what happens
there (48–49). You should thus exert yourselves so long as the
self-controlled Lord Pradyumna does not carry away Vajranābha’s daughter
(50). Those Dānavas, elated with the pride of the boon conferred by
Brahmā, are not to be slain by the gods. So their destruction in the
battle-field should be brought about by Pradyumna and other sons of gods
(51). An actor, Bhadra by name, has of late obtained the boon (of
entering into his city). So the Yadavas, headed by Pradyumna, will enter
into Vajranābha’s city in his guise (52). O Dhārtarāshtras, you are to
do all that I have said. Besides for doing me this good you should do
what more crops up in time. O swans, to enter into the city of Vajra
depends on his will. The gods cannot enter there by any means whatsoever
(53–54)".