TITLE: KRISHNA’S ENTRANCE INTO DWARAKA AND RECEPTION

Vaishampāyana said:—Thus looking at Dwāraka, Krishna, of most excellent
eyes, saw his own house consisting of hundreds of palaces. He saw there
a million of white jewelled pillars, a gate with jems lustrous like fire
and a number of effulgent golden seats placed here and there. For his
court a huge palace had been made entirely of gold with crystal pillars.
He also saw beautiful and big lakes, with its water full of lotuses and
fragrant red lotuses resorted to by maddened peacocks and coels, with
golden and jewelled stairs and adorned with various other trees. That
house was encircled by Viswakarma with stone walls hundred yards high
which were girt with ditches. After the measurement of Indra’s palace
the celestial Architect had built that house on a plot of land measuring
half a _yojana_ on all sides. Seated on Garuda’s back she saw that
sable-hued palace (1-8). He then blew his conch the sound of which made
the hairs of his enemies stand erect. At that sound the ocean was
greatly agitated and the sky resounded. Indeed it appeared very
wonderful (9). Hearing the sound of Panchajanya conch-shell and seeing
Garuda all the members of the Kukura and Andhaka families were freed
from sorrow (10). Beholding Keshava effulgent like the sun, with
conch-shell, discus, and club in his hands, seated on Garuda, the
citizens attained to an excess of joy. Thereupon they began to beat
trumpets, blew bugles and set up leonine shouts. Afterwards beholding
the slayer of Madhu the Kukuras, Andhakas and other Dāsharhas began to
approach him with great delight (11-13). Placing Vasudeva before him and
accompanied with the sound of conch-shells and trumpets, the king
Ugrasenā repaired to Vāsudeva’s palace. Devaki, Rohini and Ahuka’s wives
began to move about with joy in their own houses. A few moments after,
Hari whom serve Indra and other gods, arrived at the appointed house
(14-16).

Having got down at the entrance of his house, Krishna, the foremost of
the Yadu race, showed proper respect to all the Yadus. And himself
honored by Rāma, Ahuka, Gada, Pradyumna and others he entered into his
residence with the mountain of jewels (17-18). Rukshmini’s son Pradyumna
himself took to the house the Pārijāta the most favourite of Indra’s
trees (19). By the power of the Pārijāta the heroes saw the beauty of
their own persons and attained to great delight (20). Thus eulogized by
the delighted Yadu chiefs Krishna entered into the house constructed by
Viswakarma (21). Having placed that mountain of jems with summits in his
inner appartment Achyuta, of incomparable energy, united with the
Vrishnis, worshipped the celestial tree Pārijāta and planted it in its
proper place.

Thereupon obtaining the permission of his own kinsmen Keshava, the
slayer of heroes, honored all the maidens he had brought from Naraka’s
house with raiments, ornaments, maid-servants, riches and objects of
enjoyment. Those maidens had already been received honourably by Devaki,
Rohini, Revati and Ahuka’s wives. By his good luck Satyabhāmā ruled over
all the females, and Bhishmaka’s daughter Rukshmini was in charge of the
relatives. Krishna allotted to each of those women, separate houses,
tanks, and gardens. (22–28).