TITLE: ANIRUDDHA’S WEDDING AND RECEPTION

Vaishampāyana said:—Thereupon having his eyes expanded with joy the
large-armed Ahuka said to the highly effulgent Krishna:—"O descendant of
Yadu, hear what I say. O my child, seeing thee safely return we are all
enjoying with the Apsaras. Do thou undertake a great festival for
Aniruddha’s return and wedding. United with Aniruddha and encircled by
her friends the great Ushā is living with the greatest possible
pleasure. Baidarbhi says that the great daughter of the high-souled
Kumbhānda should be enlisted as Ushā’s companion. Confer now that
charming and beautiful daughter of Kumbhānda on Shāmva and the remaining
maidens should be duly given unto the other princes. Let a great
festival take place in thy residence as well as in that of Aniruddha.
Hear, the damsels of sweet voice are playing on musical instruments in
the inner appartment. Some of them are dancing and others are singing.
Some with glee are conversing with one another. And some, adorned with
garlands and clad in variegated raiments, are moving about hither and
thither. Some, under the influence of wine, are going to others, and
some, with eyes expanded in joy, are playing at chess. Ushā is encircled
by her companions; take her into the palace. The beautiful and noble
daughter of Vāna, by name Ushā, is a worthy daughter-in-law of thy race.
Welcome her with all dignity (1-11)."

After Ahuka had said this females, performing benedictory ceremonies, as
laid down in the ritualistic code, conducted the beautiful Ushā to
Aniruddha’s house. Beholding Aniruddha Devaki, Revati and the Bidarbha
princess Rukshmini shed tears of joy. Thus when Ushā was taken into the
room, the beautiful damsels, blowing bugles, began to perform
benedictory ceremonies. The beautiful Ushā too, under the shelter of the
Yadu chiefs, lived in their palace and enjoyed best of happiness
(12-16). After a few days, the Apsarā Chitralekha, who was living there
under the guise of a woman, with the permission of Ushā and other
companions, started for the celestial region. Thus after the departure
of her companions Māyāvati first invited the beautiful Asura princess
Ushā and took her to her own residence. Seeing her youthful and
beautiful daughter-in law Ushā Pradyumna’s wife welcomed her with costly
jewels and dresses. Thereupon according to the custom of the family all
the ladies of the Yadu race duly treated the new daughter in-law Ushā
(17–20).

Vaishampāyana said:—O upholder of the Kuru race, I have thus described
to you how Vāna was vanquished by Vishnu in battle and left alive.
Afterwards, encircled by the Yadavas and enjoying the highest prosperity
Krishna lived in Dwarakā and governed the whole world. O king, thus
incarnating himself on earth Vishnu was celebrated by the name of
Vāsudeva the foremest of the Yadu race. You had formerly questioned me
as to the cause of the powerful Vishnu’s taking birth from Devaki in
Vasudeva’s family in the Vrishni race. These are all the causes thereof.
O Janameyaja, you heard all that I had said at length relating to
Nārada’s question and Vasudeva’s reply in the episode of the wonderful
incident. I have removed your doubts about Krishna’s life and conduct in
Mathurā and have described all his movements. Krishna is the abode of
wonders: there is nothing more wonderful than he. There is no wonder
which has not been performed by Vishnu. Vishnu is the foremost of the
blessed—the origin and bestower of good fortune. Amongst the Aditvas and
Daityas there is none more wonderful than Achyuta. He is Adityas, Vasas,
Rudras, Maruts, the two Ashwinis, the sky, earth, quarters, water and
luminous bodies. Vishnu alone is the creator, preserver and destroyer,
truth, Tapas and the grand-father Brahma. Salute him, O descendant of
Bharata. This lord of the celestials is the whole universe, is Ananta
amongst the Nāgas and Shankara amongst the Rudras. This universe, mobile
and immobile, has emanated from Nārāyana. Janārddana has created this
whole universe. That Eternal One alone is always adorable unto the gods.
Thus have I recounted Keshava’s glories and Vāna’s battle. Listening to
them you will acquire incomparable family prestige. Sin will not invade
them, who will meditate on Vāna’s battle and the most excellent deed of
Keshava. O Janamejaya, thus after the termination of the sacrifice as
questioned by you, I have described all the glorious deeds of Vishnu. O
king, the man who can meditate on all these wonderful themes, in his
mind, is freed from sins and repairs to the region of Vishnu. He, who
will recite this every morning, will meet with no calamity either in
this world or in the next. By reciting it the Brāhmanas will be versed
in the Saman, the Kshatriyas will acquire victories, the Vaishyas will
amass riches and the Sudras will fare well. He, who will recite this,
will be visited by no misfortune and live a long life.

Souti said:—O foremost of the twice-born, hearing this Harivamsha,
Parikshit’s son Janamejaya was freed from sins. O Sounaka, I have thus
described to you Hari’s family at length and in brief. What more do you
wish to hear again? (21-41).

BHAVISHYA PARVA OR THE BOOK OF FUTURE.