TITLE: INDRA FIGHTS WITH KRISHNA

Vaishampāyana said:—Having saluted then the Lord of Vilwa and water,
Krishna, the high-minded slayer of Madhu, went away on his own car; and
seated thereon he invited the king of gods accompanied by the celestials
near Pushkara (1-2).

Thereupon the effulgent Sakra, the granter of all desires unto the pious
and Jayanta got upon cars drawn by most excellent horses (3). O
descendant of Kurus, then under the influence of destiny there took
place an encounter between those two celestials mounted on their cars on
account of the Pārijāta. With straight-coursing arrows Vishnu, the
represser of enemies’ army, struck the soldiers of the king of gods.
Although capable however, O lord, Indra did not strike Upendra in battle
nor the latter the former (4–6). O king, with ten sharpened arrows
Janārddana struck each of the horses of the king of gods: Vāsava too,
the foremost of the celestials, with dreadful shafts shot off the bow,
covered Shaiyya and other horses (7-8). With a thousand of arrows
Krishna covered the elephant (of Indra) and the highly powerful slayer
of Bali covered Garuda too (9). O descendant of Bharata, while in this
way, seated on their cars the high-souled Nārāyana, dreadful unto his
enemies and the king of gods fought with each another, the earth shook
like a boat sunk in water and the quarters were fully enshrouded with
lustre (10-11). Mountains shook, hundreds of trees were uprooted and
pious mortals fell down on earth (12). O king, hundreds of hurricane
blew there. And while that battle raged on, the course of the rivers was
changed in an opposite direction, the wind blew wild, fire-brands, shorn
of lustre, fell down and creatures repeatedly lost their consciousness
at the rattle of the car-wheels. What more, O king, fire was lighted
even in the water and planets fought with planets in the sky (13–15).
And hundreds of stars fell down on earth from the sky. Elephants of the
quarters and those ranging on earth began to quiver (16). The welkin was
covered with cranes emitting loud cries, pouring down dreadful blood and
ash-coloured like asses (17). O foremost of kings, beholding those two
heroic gods engaged in fighting with each other the earth, heaven and
sky as if disappeared from view (18). At that time for the behoof of the
world the ascetics began to recite Mantras and the Brāhmanas speedily
engaged in carrying on meditations (19).

Thereupon the highly powerful Brahmā said to Kashyapa:—"O you of firms
vows, go with your wife Aditi and prevent your two sons" (20). Saying
"So be it" to the lotus-sprung deity the ascetic speedily went out on
his car to that foremost of men (21). Beholding Kashyapa with Aditi in
the battle-field those two heroic and highly powerful slayers of their
enemies, ever engaged in the welfare of all beings and well-read in the
tenets of religions, got down from their cars, and leaving off their
arms, saluted the feet of their parents (22–23). Then holding them both
by the hands Aditi said:—"Born of the same parents you are trying to
slay each other as if you are not brothers. Let pass what has happened.
If you think that you should obey the words of your mother and those of
your patriarchal father, then lay down your arms and hear what I say."
Saying "So be it" those two highly powerful celestials, conversing with
each other, went to the bank of the river Jānhavi (24–27).

Sakra said:—"O Krishna, thou art the Lord Creator of the universe and I
have been placed by thee in my kingdom. Having thyself established me
here why dost thou disregard me? O thou of lotus eyes, having accepted
me as thy elder brother why dost thou wish to destroy me?" (28–29)

O king, having bathed in the water of the river Jānhavi they both
returned to the high-souled Kashyapa of firm vows and Aditi (30). The
ascetics designate that place as the union ground of dear ones where
those two lotus-eyed brothers were united with their parents (31). O
descendant of Kurus, after Krishna had promised safety unto Indra in the
very presence of the pious celestials who were assembled there, they
all, shining in their respective beautiful forms, repaired to the
celestial region on their own cars (32–33). O king, seated on one car
Kashyapa, Aditi, Indra and Upendra set out for the celestial region
(34), O descendant of Kuru, after those pious gods had come to Sakra,
endued with all qualities and taken their seats, Sachi, ever fond of
virtue, adored the high souled Kashyapa along with his wife, ever
engaged in the well-being of all creatures (35-36). Thereupon after the
night had elapsed Aditi, conversant with the principles of religion,
said to Hari ever encompassing good unto creatures (37). "O Upendra!
take this Pārijāta, go to Dwarkā and perform the auspicious festival so
longed for by your wife. But, O foremost of men, when that ceremony will
be over, you are to bring back this tree and place it as before in the
garden of Nandana" (38–39).

Hearing this Krishna said to the illustrious mother of the gods "So be
it." The high-souled Nārada too gave consent to it (40). Thereupon
having saluted his mother, father and Mahendra with Sachi Janārddana
expressed his desire of going to Dwārakā (41). The pious daughter of
Puloma handed over to Krishna many lovely ornaments for his wives (42).
For the sixteen thousand wives of Mādhava the high-minded daughter of
Puloma gave diverse celestial jewels and raiments of various colours.
Having accepted all those presents and been honored by the pious rangers
of the sky the highly energetic and effulgent Keshava set out with
Pradyumna and Sātyaki for Dwārakā and arrived at the mount Raivataka.
Having planted there the foremost of trees Pārijāta Mādhava despatched
Sātyaki to Dwārakā consisting of doors (43–46).

Krishna said:—"O large-armed king of Bhaimas, communicate this news to
the Bhaimas that I brought here Pārijāta from the abode of Mahendra
(47). Even to-day I shall take to Dwarakā this best of trees Pārijāta:
let the city be decorated with auspicious marks" (48). O lord, thus
accosted Satyaki departed. And having communicated Krishna’s words to
the Bhaimas he joined the citizens and the princes headed by Sāmva (49).
Thereupon having placed Pārijāta on Garuda’s back and taking him before,
Pradyumna, the foremost of car-warriors, entered the charming city of
Dwaraka (50). Hari, seated on a car drawn by Shaivya and other horses,
and Sātyaki and Pradyumna, seated on another most excellent car,
followed him. O king, speaking highly of that deed of Keshava, other
members of the Vrishni family set out delightedly on various conveyances
(51-52). Hearing from Satyaki of the wonderful feat of Keshava of
incomparable energy the Yadu citizens of Anartta were filled with
surprise. Now beholding that tree covered with heavenly flowers they
could not attain to the consummation of delight though they repeatedly
looked at it (53–54). Beholding that unthought-of, most excellent and
wonderful tree filled with playful birds, even the decrepitude of the
elderly women disappeared. Smelling the fragrance of that tree the blind
were gifted with celestial vision and the diseased were shorn of their
ailments (55–56). Hearing the notes of the birds from that tree
resembling those of a koel the inhabitants of Anartta were filled with
delight and saluted Janārddana (57). Though living at a distance people
of that city listened to various sweet songs and music proceeding from
that tree (58). At that time every man was favoured with whatever
fragrance he wished for proceeding from that Pārijāta tree (59). Having
thus entered the charming city of Dwārakā, Keshava, of Yadu’s race, met
with Vasudeva, Devaki, his brother Bala, the king of Kukura, and other
Yādavas, worthy of respect like unto the immortals (60–61). Having
honored them duly the eternal and divine Madhusudana, having Gada as his
elder brother, dismissed them all and set out for his own residence. And
taking that best of trees Pārijāta he entered into Satyabhāmā’s palace.
Seeing it the divine Satyabhāmā was highly pleased; and having adored
Upendra she accepted that great tree Pārijāta (62–64).

O descendant of Bharata, according to Vasudeva’s desire that tree used
to lessen its proportion. It created great surprise in all. O
Janamejaya, it, sometimes assuming a huge proportion, used to cover the
whole of Dwarakā, and again it came within the reach of all being of the
shape of a thumb. Having thus accomplished her object Satyabhāmā began
to collect all materials for the performance of the rite of Punyaka.
Krishna collected all that could be had in the insular continent of
Jamvu. O descendant of Kuru, thereupon seated with Satya the
self-controlled Keshava, for taking the vow, thought of the ascetic
Nārada (65–69).