TITLE: AN ACCOUNT OF ILA’S FAMILY

Vaishampayana said:—Ilā’s son had seven high-souled sons resembling the
sons of the celestials born in the celestial region (1). They were Ayu,
Dhimān, Amavasu, the high-souled Vishwāyu, Srutāyu, Dridayu, Valāyu, and
Shatayu. They were all Urvashi’s sons. Amāvasu’s sons were Bhima and
Nagnajit (2). Bhima’s son was the king Kānchanaprabha. Kānchana’s son
was the highly powerful and learned Suhotra who begat on Keshini a son
by name Janhu who celebrated the great sacrifice Sarvamedha (3–4). Gangā
solicited him to become her husband but on account of his refusal she
flooded the Yajna ground (5). O foremost of the Bharata race, beholding
the ground thus flooded by Gangā Suhotra’s son Janhu became enraged and
said to her (6), "I shall exhaust your water by drinking it up and you
will thus meet with punishment for your arrogance (7)." The royal saint
having drunk up Gangā the great Rishis designated her as his daughter by
name Jānhavi (8). Janhu espoused Yuvanāshwa’s daughter Kāveri. On
account of Yuvanāshwa’s curse Gangā made, with one half of her person,
that foremost of rivers, Janhu’s wife the blameless Kāveri (9). Janhu
begat on Kāveri a beloved and pious son by name Susaha whose son was
Ajāka (10). Ajaka’s son the king Valākāshwa was greatly fond of hunting.
His son was Kusha (11). He had four sons effulgent like the gods. They
were Kushika, Kushanābha, Kushashwa and Murtimān (12). The king Kushika
grew up with _Pazhavas_⁵⁵ ranging in the forest. He carried on hard
penances for obtaining a son like Indra. Out of fear, accordingly the
king of gods was born as a son to him (13). After he had carried on
penances for one thousand years Sakra saw that royal saint of hard
austerities. Seeing him the thousand-eyed Purandara thought him capable
of creating progeny and accordingly entered into his energy. When the
king of celestials was thus begotten by Kushika as his son he became the
king Gādhi who was born of Purukutsa’s daughter who was the wife of
Kushika (14–16). Gādhi’s daughter was the noble and amiable Satyavati.
He gave her away to Bhrigu’s son Richika (17). Bhrigu’s son was pleased
with her and therefore made _Charu_ for his own and Gadhi’s sons (18).
Then calling his own wife Bhrigu’s son Richika said to her "you and your
mother should eat this _Charu_ (19). (Your mother) will give birth to an
effulgent son the foremost of Kshatryas. No other Kshatriya in this
world will be able to vanquish him and he will destroy all the leading
heroes of the military caste (20). O auspicious damsel, this _Charu_
will make your son intelligent, a great ascetic of controlled senses and
the foremost of the twice born (21)."

Having said this to his wife Bhrigu’s son Richika entered into woods for
carrying on hard austerities without any interruption (22). At that time
starting on pilgrimage with his family the king Gādhi arrived at
Richika’s hermitage for seeing his own daughter (23). Taking the two
cups of _Charu_ from the Rishi, Satyavati with great care gave one to
her mother (24). By a mere accident the mother unwittingly gave her own
_Charu_ to her daughter and ate herself the one intended for the latter
(25). Thereupon Satyavati conceived the dreadful offspring whereof was
destined to slay all the Kshatryas. She then shone in great effulgence
(26). Seeing her and knowing every thing by meditation the foremost of
the twice-born Richika said to his beautiful wife (27), "By the change
of Charu you have been imposed on by your mother. You will give birth to
a highly terrible and ruthless son (28). Your brother will be born as a
great ascetic conversant with all the Vedas. By virtue of my _Tapas_ I
have handed over my entire knowledge of the Vedas to him (29)." Thus
addressed by her husband the great Satyavati said to him "I do not wish
to have such a wretch of a Brāhmana as my son from you" and began to
propitiate him. Thus accosted the ascetic again said to her (30). "O you
auspicious dame, I myself did not wish for such a son. On account of the
father and mother the son becomes cruel." Satyavati again replied to him
(31). "You can create the worlds if you like, what to speak of a son.
You should therefore give me a simple-minded son capable of controlling
his senses (32). O lord, O foremost of the twice-born, if you cannot
undo this, may a grandson be born after my heart (33)."

Thereupon by virtue of his _Tapas_ he became propitiated with her and
said "O fair one, I make no distinction between a son and a grandson.
Therefore what you have said will come to pass" (34).

Satyavati then gave birth to a son by name Jamadagni always controlling
his senses and intent upon carrying on hard austerities (35). On account
of the change of Bhrigu’s _Charu_ and the union (of the energies) of
Rudra and Vishnu Jamadagni was born from the energy of the latter. And
the truthful and pious Satyavati now passes as the celebrated river
Koushiki (36–37).

There was another powerful king of the Ikshwāku race by name Renuka. His
daughter was the great Renukā. The great ascetic Jamadagni begat on that
Renukā a dreadful and highly effulgent son by name Rāma, the destroyer
of all the Kshatryas, a master of all sciences and specially that of
archery (38–40). Thus by virtue of _Tapas_ Richika begat on Satyavati
the highly illustrious Jamadagni—the foremost of those conversant with
the Vedas (41). His second son was Shunasepha and his youngest son was
Shunapuchha. Kushika’s son Gādhi begat as his son Viswāmitra endued with
_Tapas_ and the quality of self-control. Having obtained the status of
Brāhmana saints he became one of the seven Rishis (42–43). The virtuous
souled Viswāmitra also passed by the name of Viswaratha. By Bhrigu’s
favour he took his birth from Koushika as the multiplier of his race
(44). Viswāmitra’s sons were Devarāt and others celebrated in the three
worlds. Hear from me their names (45). He begat Kati on Devasravā from
whom Kātyānas received their name. He begat Hiranyaksha on Shālāvati and
Renumān on Renu. Sāngkriti Gālava and Mudgala are also well-known.
Madhuchhanda and other Devalas, Ashtaka, Kachhapa and Purita are all the
offspring of Viswāmitra. The families of the high-souled descendants of
Kushika are all well-known (46–48). Pānis, Vabhrus, Karajapās and other
kings are the descendants of Devarat. Shālankāyānas, Vāskalas, Lohityas,
Yāmadutas, Karishis, Soushrutas and besides Saindavāyanas are all the
descendants of Koushika. Devalas and Renus are the grandsons of Renukā.
Yājnawalka, Aghamarshana, Udumvara, Abhiglāna, Tārakāyana and Chunchula
are the grandsons of Sālavati and sons of Hiranyāksha. Sānskritya,
Gālava, Bādrayana and others are the offspring of the intelligent
Viswāmitra. Thus the family of Koushika is well-known to all. They are
married according to grades. The connection, between the Brāhmanas and
Kshatryas amongst the family of Puru and the Brāhmana saint Vasishtha
and of Koushikas, is well known for ever (49–53). Of the sons of
Viswāmitra Sunasepha was the eldest. The foremost of saints Bhārgava
became also a Koushika (54). Viswāmitra’s son Sunasepha was destined to
be killed at the sacrifice of Haridashwa (55). The gods again returned
Sunasepha unto Viswamitra and for this he passed by the name of
Devarāta. Devarāta and six others were the sons of Viswamitra, who begat
on Drishadvati another son by name Ashtaka. Ashtaka’s son was Louhi.
Thus I have described the family of Janhu and I shall now describe the
progeny of Ayu (56-58).

⁵⁵ The name of one of the degraded Kshatrya races sentenced by Sagara
 to wear beards, perhaps a _Parthian_.