TITLE: THE PROPOSAL OF RELIEVING THE EARTH OF HER BURDEN

Vaishampayana said:—Hearing these words of Vishnu, Brahmā, the
Grand-Father of all, gave vent to words fraught with the well-being of
gods (1). "There is no fear, from the Asuras, of the gods whom you give
protection by becoming their leader in various battles (2). When you
yourself, the slayer of your enemies, and the king of gods, are crowned
with victory, what fear do men, engaged in religious observances,
cherish (3)? Truthful and pious men are always freed from ills. Death
cannot prematurely visit the pious (4). Enjoying their sixth portion,
the kings, the foremost of men, do not fear one another (5). Doing good
to their subjects and realizing duly tributes from their tributary kings
without being blamed by them, they fill up their treasuries with wealth
(6). Meting out mild punishment and being forbearing they govern their
respective prosperous provinces and protect the four Varnas (7). Without
creating disturbance amongst their subjects and being adored well by
their ministers and protected by the four divisions of army they are
enjoying the six means¹⁷⁵ (8). They are all well-versed in the science
of archery, observant of the Vedic rites and they all worship the gods
with sacrifices accompanied by profuse gifts (9). Having performed the
ceremony of initiation and studied the Vedas they propitiate the great
saints with chastity in thought, words and deeds and the ancestral
manes, hundreds of times, with holy Srāddhas (10). There is no such
object in the world, Vedic, customary, and scriptural that is not known
to them (11). Believing in the great Brahman, all those kings, effulgent
like the great Rishis, are endeavouring to bring back the golden age
(12). By their power Vāsava is pouring good showers, and the winds, with
dust removed, are duly blowing in the ten quarters (13). The earth is
freed of all the evil portends and the planets are ranging at ease in
the sky. United with the stars the moon is beautifully moving about in
the sky (14). The sun, that produces regular successions, is moving in
its two paths. Being propitiated by various oblations the fire has
become sweet scented (15). The sacrifices being thus duly undertaken and
multiplied the entire world is propitiated and men cherish no fear of
death (16). The earth has been oppressed by the power of those powerful
kings of brilliant fame following one another (17). The earth, exhausted
with this weight and assailed by the kings, has come before us like a
boat on the verge of being drowned (18). Oppressed by the kings
resembling the fire of dissolution and having the mountains shaken and
the oceans agitated the earth is repeatedly perspiring (19). With the
body, energy, strength and the extensive territories of the Kshatriyas
the earth is ever enjoying peace (20). In every city the king is
surrounded by ten millions of soldiers; in every kingdom, hundreds and
thousands of villages are growing prosperous and the earth has been
completely covered with thousands of kings, their powerful army and
millions of villages (21-22). Placing before her the Time, freed of all
diseases and being shorn of energy the Earth has come to my house. O
Vishnu, thou art her most excellent refuge (23). This Earth, the land of
human actions, has been greatly assailed. It behoves thee to do that by
which the eternal Earth, the stay of the universe, may not suffer
deterioration (24). O Madhusudana, great is the iniquity in oppressing
her, since on her being assailed all the works of the humanity will come
to a close and the universe will fare ill (25). Being oppressed by the
kings the earth has become evidently exhausted. Renouncing her firmness
and natural forbearance she has grown impatient (26). We have heard her
history. Thou hast listened to it also. We shall therefore consult with
thee for relieving her of her load (27).

"Wending righteous ways all these kings are multiplying their
territories. Amongst men the three other Varna are following the
Brāhmanas (28). All the words are truthful, all the Varnas are observing
their respective duties, all the Brāhmanas are studying the Vedas and
all other men are devoted to Brāhmanas (29). Thus exist men in the world
who are the instruments of righteousness. Let such practices be observed
by which virtue may not suffer deterioration (30). This earth is the
goal of the pious and none else. Virtue is the most excellent object
they should endeavour to secure. Therefore to relieve the earth of her
burden it is meet to destroy the kings. Therefore, O great one, come
with us to hold a consultation. With the earth before us let us go to
the summit of the mount Meru (31–32)." Having said this, O foremost of
kings, the self-controlled Grand Father of all, Brahmā, of great
effulgence, began to take rest with the earth (33).

¹⁷⁵ The six acts of a king, in his military character, are peace, war,
 marching, halting, sowing dissension and seeking protection.