TITLE: ANDHAKA’S ADVICE TO KANSA

Vaishampayana said:—Beholding Vasudeva thus insulted and covering their
ears with their hands the leading Yādavas took him for one having his
lease of life run out (1). Resorting to patience, although his mind was
worked up with anxiety Andhaka, the foremost of speakers, addressed,
mildly in the midst of that assembly, powerful words to Kansa (2).

"O my son, it is unworthy of you to give vent to such words. To use such
words to relatives is considered unbecoming and culpable by the pious
(3). O hero, if you consider yourself as one, not born in the family of
the Yadavas listen to what I say. The Yādavas do not by force wish to
regard you as one of them (4). Rather a person like you becoming their
master they have become censurable to all. What more, it appears, that
the king Asamanja, of the Ikshaku race, has returned in your person (5).
O my son, you may wear matted locks, may have your head shaved, may take
any appellation, Bhoja, Yādava or Kansa, your head will remain in its
natural shape (6). Cursed is that Ugrasena who has begotten a son like
you, a wretch and curse of our family (7). O my son, the wise never make
themselves a parade of their own accomplishments. The qualities,
recognized by the Vedas, attain to fructification when spoken of by
others (8). A stupid boy, the destroyer of his race like you, becoming
our king the family of Yadus has become degraded among the royal
families of the world (9). The vilifications, that you have given vent
to, considering them as proper, have not been able to accomplish your
object rather you have laid bare your character before the public (by
it) (10). Will you consider the insulting of a highly worshipful
innocent preceptor, like the destruction of a Brāhmana, as conducive to
well-being (11)? O my son, the aged ought to be adored and worshipped
like fire²⁴⁹ for their anger can consume even the regions acquired by
Yoga (12). Self-controlled and learned men, of advanced intellect,
should enquire into the conduct of the people as they watch the
movements of fish in water (13). Like an oblation not consecrated by
_mantras_ you always pain the fire-like aged people with heart-rending
words (14). You are remonstrating with Vasudeva for his son. We speak
ill of your these useless and abominable words (15). If a son becomes
wicked the father is not so, rather he falls into many difficulties on
account of his son (16). You might think that Vasudeva did not do his
duty by hiding his own baby son. But ask your own father about it (17).
Chiding Vasudeva and speaking ill of the Yadu race you have acquired
poison consequent upon the enmity of the Yādavas (18). If Vasudeva has
acted unfairly by doing this for his son why did not Ugrasena kill you
in your infancy (19)? Persons, conversant with moral laws, have given
the name of _Putra_²⁵⁰ to a son because he saves the departed ancestors
from falling into the hell of Put (20).

"From the very beginning of their birth you have been cherishing enmity
towards the youthful Sankarshana and Krishna although born in the race
of the Yādavas and they too consider you as their enemy (21). On account
of your chiding Vasudeva and exciting the anger of Vāsudeva the hearts
of all the Yadavas are trembling (22).

"On account of your thus remonstrating with Vasudeva Krishna has become
your enemy and therefore these evil omens are declaring your future fear
(23). Evil dreams in the end of night and dreadful portends like the
vision of of serpents are all declaring that this city will soon be a
widow²⁵¹ (24). Behold in the sky the dreadful planet _Rahu_, by his own
effulgence, is possessing the star _Swāti_²⁵² and is waiting in your
tenth star _Chitra_.²⁵³ The dreadful planet _Mangala_²⁵⁴ is united with
them in its oblique course (25). By its dreadful effulgence _Budha_²⁵⁵
has covered the western sky in the evening. And going beyond its course
Sukra is ranging in the sky (26). Separated by the tail of _Ketu_²⁵⁶
_Bharani_²⁵⁷ and other twelve planets are following the moon (27).
Encircled by a disc the dawn with its effulgence is obstructing the sun
and the birds and animals are going in contrary directions with cries
(23) Crying continually and emitting ember-like breaths the dreadful
jackals are coming out of the cremation-grounds and going towards the
city both in the morning and evening (29). Fire-brands are falling on
earth with a terrible sound and the earth and mountain summits are
shaking all on a sudden (30). The sun being possessed by Rahu the day is
appearing like a night and all the quarters are filled with portendous
smoke and thunder-bolts (31). The thick clouds, accompanied by
lightnings, are pouring down blood—the gods are being shaken off their
stations and the birds are leaving their resting trees (32). What more,
all the evil omens, described by the astrologers as indicating the
future death of a king, have set in (33). You are always harmful towards
your relatives, backward in observing your royal duties and wrathful for
nothing. Therefore your death is imminent (34). When you have out of
your foolishness insulted the aged and god-like Vasudeva resembling a
Vasu, there is no peace for you (35). You are an enemy of our race. From
to-day we drive away the love that we had for you. After this we shall
not adore you even for a moment (36). That giver, of gifts among us, is
blessed who will behold the lotus-eyed Krishna of unwearied actions
(now) ranging in the forest (37). For you this Yadu race is uprooted.
Krishna will again unite his own kinsmen (38). Your sense has been
entirely destroyed by Destiny. Speak whatever you like. Vasudeva will
forgive you for all (39). O Kansa, I think it proper now that aided by
Vasudeva, you should go to Krishna and ingratiate yourself to his good
graces" (40).

²⁴⁹ Fire was an object of worship with the ancient Aryans. It was
 compulsory for three higher castes to preserve consecrated fire in
 their house. It was kept perpetually and handed down from one
 generation to another. From the Vedic writings it appears that the
 ancient Aryans used to worship fire as a sacred element. This
 fire-worship still prevails amongst the followers of Zoroaster.
 This fact goes to prove that the Parsis and the Hindus are of the
 same stock.

²⁵⁰ Putra is derived from _Put_ the name of a hell and the root _tra_
 to save from the hell _Put_.

²⁵¹ _i.e._ The master of the city will soon die.

²⁵² The star Arcturus or fifteenth lunar asterism consisting of but
 one star. Mythologically it is one of the wives of the sun.

²⁵³ A star in the virgin’s spike. _Swati_ is the star under whose
 influence Kansa was born. _Chitra_ was then in the tenth place.
 Rahu was inimical there. From this, it is evident that all his
 attempts will prove futile and he will meet with death.

²⁵⁴ The planet Mars.

²⁵⁵ The planet Mercury. This portends that his adminstration will come
 to an end.

²⁵⁶ The dragon’s tail or descending node, in astronomy the ninth of
 the planets. The rising of a comet is an evil omen.

²⁵⁷ The name of the sacred lunar asterism containing three stars.