TITLE: KRISHNA MEETS WITH PARASURAMA

Vaishampayana said:—Hearing the words of Vikadru the highly illustrious
Vasudeva, with a delighted mind, said:—"O Krishna, what the intelligent
Vikadru, the foremost of royal speakers, and conversant with the meaning
of royal counsels has said, is true and well meaning. He has related
royal duties and truths conducive to the well-being of the universe. Do
what that foremost of Yadus has said (1-3)".

Hearing the words of his father and of the high-souled Vikadru, Krishna,
the foremost of men, gave vent to the following reasonable words (4). "I
have listened to what you have said, surveying (the course of) the
Providence according to reason, order, logic and scriptures (5). Hear
the reply that I give and accept it after hearing. The king should
behave according to order and moral laws (6). A king daily meditates on
peace, quarrel, conveyance, seats, dissension-making and help (7). A
learned king should not place himself before a powerful enemy, but
rather should fly away. And in proper time and according to his strength
he should engage in fight (8). Therefore although I am capable, I shall,
at this very moment, fly away with the worshipful Baladeva for saving my
life like one incapable (9). Ascending the mount Sahya beautiful like
myself along with my reverend elder brother, I shall enter into Deccan
and we shall behold the charming cities of Karavira and Krounch and the
foremost of mountains Gomanta (10-11). Hearing of this our departure
that Emperor, elated with success, will not enter into this city but
rather will pursue us in pride. And repairing to the forest of Sahya
with his followers he will endeavour to arrest us (12-13). Therefore
this our departure is conducive to the well-being of the race of Yadu.
By this, the Province, the city and the citizens will fare well (14).
When an enemy flies away from his kingdom, the kings, desirous of
achieving victory while in another kingdom, do not desist from fighting
without killing the enemies (15)".

After this conversation, the heroic Krishna and Sangkarshana, although
capable, set out for the south without experiencing the least anxiety in
mind (19). Assuming forms at will they began to travel in hundreds of
southern kingdoms (17). Thereupon getting upon the charming mountain of
Sahya and experiencing joy they reached the road leading to the south
(18). Going by that road they, within a short time, reached the city of
Karavira, presided over by the members of their own family and adorned
with the mount Sahya. They saw there a huge fig tree on the bank of the
river Venā (19–20). They saw there the eternal great ascetic Rāma, the
descendant of Bhrigu who is never exhausted and like the sun on the
mount Mandara milching his sacrificial cow with her calf ever giving
milk whenever desired and white as the milky Arani tree near the mount
Mahendra. He was seated at the foot of that tree, had his axe on his
shoulder, wore bark and matted locks, was white as the flames of fire,
effulgent like the sun, the destroyer of the Kshatriyas, motionless like
the ocean, was preserving the three sacred fires, was emaciated with the
performance of three oblations a day and was like the very preceptor of
gods (21-26).

Thereupon Krishna, the foremost of speakers and conversant with the
history of men, addressed that foremost of Rishis, in sweet words saying
(27):—"O Reverend Sir, I have known thee as the foremost of Rishis,
Rāma, the son of Jamadagni born in the race of Bhrigu, and the destroyer
of the Kshatriyas (28). O descendant of Bhrigu, having agitated the
ocean with the velocity of thy shafts thou hast laid out a city by name
Surpāra, two thousand cubits in breadth and one thousand in length. Thou
hast laid out a great province in the prosperous groves of the Sahya
mountain situated on the bank of the great ocean. Remembering the
destruction of thy sire thou didst, with thy axe, chop off the thousand
arms of Kārtavirya resembling a forest. Even now the Earth has her mud
covered with the cool blood of the Kshatryas who were killed by thy axe
and were shorn of effulgence. O son of Renukā, the axe remains here in
the same way in which thou didst hold it in battle on earth out of anger
against the Kshatryas. O Vipra, we wish to hear from thee some thing. Do
thou reply to it without any hesitation of mind. O foremost of Munis,
perhaps thou mightest have heard of two Yādavas living on the bank of
the Yamunā. We are those two Yadavas living in Mathurā. From the very
commencement of our birth, our father Vasuveda, the foremost of Yadus
and ever observant of vows, afraid of Kansa, placed us in Vraja. There
we grew up without any fear (29–37). As soon as we came of age we
entered into Mathurā and powerfully destroyed the haughty Kansa in the
assembly (38). Thereupon placing his father Ugrasena in his royal office
we again, as before, engaged in the work of cow-herd boys (39). O thou
of firm vows, thereafter when Jarāsandha laid seige to our city for many
times and fought we, although capable, in the interest of our city and
subjects, in fear of his preparations, left our city on foot, for we are
not powerful, have made no preparations and have no soldiers, carts,
coats of mail and weapons (40–42). Thus, O foremost of Munis, we have
come to thee. Do thou welcome us with good counsels (43)."

Hearing those their becoming words Renukā’s son Rāma, born in the race
of Bhrigu, replied in words pregnant with morality (44).

"O lord Krishna, in order to give you counsels I have just alone come to
this place without my disciples (45). O thou having lotus-eyes, I know
thy habitation in Vraja and the destruction of the vicious-souled Kansa
and other Dānavas (46). Coming to know now of thine and Rama’s quarrel
with Jarāsandha I have come here, O thou having a beautiful face, O
foremost of men (47). O Krishna, I know, though not a boy, thou, the
eternal lord of the universe, hast become a boy, for encompassing the
work of the gods (48). Although there is nothing in the three worlds
which thou dost not know still listen to what I say out of devotion
(49). O Govinda, thy predecessors laid out and established this city of
Karavirapura (50). O Krishna, now in this city reigns the highly
wrathful, illustrious and celebrated king Vasudeva Shrigāla (51). Out of
jealousy towards the heroes that king has destroyed all thy kinsmen and
the kings born in thy race (52). O Govinda, the king Shrigāla is greatly
proud, of uncontrolled mind, cannot look at other’s prosperity, is
elated with the pride of his kingdom and riches and is even oppressive
towards his own sons (53). Methinks, O foremost of men, thou shouldst
not live in this dreadful Karavirapura, censured by all the kings (54).
Hear, now, I shall describe the place stationed where thou wouldst be
able to obstruct and fight with thy enemy Jarāsandha puffed up with
power (55). Mayst thou fare well, O Mādhava. Let us this very day cross
the sacred river Venā with our arms and spend the night on the
impassable mountain situated at the boundary of this kingdom (56).
Spending a night on one of the minor ranges of the Sahya mountain named
Yajnagiri the abode of dreadful beasts living upon flesh, abounding in
trees and creepers and adorned with blossoming trees and crossing the
river Khatangi, resembling the water-fall of Gangā issuing out of the
great mountain and adorned with golden lotuses we shall see the
water-falls of the Ganges adorned with various woods of the ascetics.
Repairing to that hill we shall behold there the ascetics who do not
care for honors although worthy of them. Then crossing the river we
shall go to the charming city of Krouncha (57-61). O Krishna, the lord
of that province is the pious king Mahākapi born in thy race (62).
Without paying a visit to that king we shall repair to the eternally
sacred shrine Andhuha for spending the night (63). Issuing therefrom we
shall go to the celebrated hill Gomanta consisting of many summits
situate in the valley of the mount Sahya (64). O Krishna, one of the
summits has risen so high up into the sky that even the birds cannot get
on it. It is the resting place of the gods, enveloped with luminous
bodies, high as an etherial house and like the stare-case of the
celestial region; (what more) that mountain is like the second Sumeru
and the landing stage for all the celestial conveyances (65–66). Getting
upon that high summit ye will range there seeing the sun and the moon,
the effulgent lords of the luminous bodies, at the time of their rising
and setting and the great ocean of heaving waves and adorning the
insular continent of Apara (67–68). Ranging in the forest situate on the
summit of the mount Gomanta if you obstruct Jarāsandha by fighting with
him in the fort you will be able to conquer him (69). Beholding you on
the summit of the mountain Jarāsandha will become incapable of fighting
in the rocks. I see before me the weapons that you will acquire when
that terrible battle will set in (70–71). O Krishna, as ordained by the
gods, such a battle will take place there between other kings and the
Yādavas that the earth will be filled with the mud of flesh and blood
(72). Appearing as if in the very forms of death, the discus,
plough-share, the club Kōumodaki, the mace Saunada and other Vaishana
weapons will, in that battle, drink the blood of the kings urged on by
death (73–74). O Krishna, O thou the stay of the celestials, in that
battle of discus and mace, as ordained by the gods and brought on by
Time, the celestials and thy enemies will behold thine Vishnu form
(75–76). For accomplishing the work of the gods, which has not come
within thy recollection for a long time, do thou, in thy Vishnu form,
take up that discus and club (77). Let Rohini’s son, the stay of the
world, take up, for destroying the enemies of the gods, dreadful mace
and plough-share capable of grinding the enemies (78). As spoken by the
gods at their meeting held for relieving the earth of her burden this
will be thy first battle in the world with the kings (79). In this
battle thou shalt attain to thy Vishnu form, weapons, prosperity and
energy and destroy the army of the enemies (80), O Krishna, this battle
will sow the seeds of the great battle, abounding in weapons, that will
be named Bhārata (81). Do thou therefore go to that best of mountains
Gomanta. From the signs it appears that Jarāsandha is on the verge of
ruin (82). Drinking the ambrosia-like milk of this sacrificial cow do ye
proceed by the way pointed out by me. May good betide ye (83)".