TITLE: THE REPLY OF THE GOPAS

Vaishampayana said:—Hearing the words of Dāmodara the Gopas were greatly
delighted; and being informed of the true import of his nectarine words
they unhesitatingly replied (1):

"O boy, we have been highly pleased seeing this thy understanding
conducive to the multiplication of the kine and the well-being of the
milk-men (2). O Krishna, thou art our course, delight and refuge. Thou
dost understand our hearts and art our saviour in great disasters. Thou
art the friend of our friends (3). By thy favour, this entire hamlet of
milk-men the delightful Gokula²²⁷ has been shorn of her enemies. And
filled with auspiciousness she is living with joy and happiness like the
city of the celestials (4). Witnessing these thy deeds worthy of being
seen and which it is impossible for others to perform, beginning with
thy birth and hearing thy haughty words our minds have been filled with
surprise (5). As Purandara is amongst the celestials so thou hast
acquired supremacy amongst men by thy matchless strength, power, and
fame (6). By thy fierce power and consummate effulgence thou hast
acquired superiority amongst the mortals like unto the sun amongst the
deities (7). As is the moon amongst the gods, so thou hast acquired
prominence amongst men by thy grace, beauty, delightful countenance and
smiles (8). In strength, energy, body, and feats performed in boyhood
only Kārtikeya²²⁸ can equal thee. There is none to match thee amongst
men (9). As the great ocean cannot overleap its bank so who can
disregard your proposal regarding the performance of a _yajna_ in honor
of the mountain (10)? Let now for the well-being of the kine and milkmen
the Giri-yajana,²²⁹ instituted by thee, be undertaken by us in the place
of the Indra-yajna (11). Let delightful viands of milk be prepared and
let beautiful jars be placed at the drinking-place²³⁰ (12). Let spacious
rivers and _Dronis_²³¹ be filled with milk and take such a quantity of
fried meat and various sorts of food and drink to the mountain that the
Gopas may spend three nights (13–14). Let this _yajna_, consisting of
all milkmen and abounding in the meat of buffalo and other beasts, be at
once undertaken (15)".

Thereupon the entire village of milkmen was filled with glee along with
the delighted kine. Then with the sound of trumpets, the roar of the
bulls and the cries of the calves the Gopas were greatly rejoiced. Lakes
of curd, whirlpools of clarified butter and rivers of milk were made
there. A heap of meat and a mountain-like collection of of boiled rice
were taken to the mountain. Thus the Giri-Yajna was undertaken by all
the milkmen there. There were present the delighted Gopas and the
beautiful milk-women. Hundreds of eating-places were set up there. It
abounded in garlands, various sorts of perfumeries and incense. Various
articles of sacrifice were spread there duly. And thus in the auspicious
hour the Gopas, along with the Brāhmanas, celebrated the Giri-Yajna
(16–20). After the termination of the _yajna_, Krishna, assuming, by his
illusive energy, the form of a mountain, feasted on that most excellent
rice, meat, curd and milk (21). The Brāhmanas too were pleased with
eating there and all their desires were accomplished. And uttering there
delightedly the verses of benediction they went away (22). Assuming a
celestial form and partaking of the food and drink after his own heart
in that sacrifice the Lord Krishna smilingly said "I am satisfied" (23).
Then beholding on the top of the hill Krishna in the form of a mountain
embellished with celestial garlands and pastes, the leading Gopas,
bowing, sought refuge with him (24). The omnipotent Lord Krishna, having
his true form hidden by the mountain, himself adored his own self along
with the bowing Gopas (25).

The Gopas, filled with surprise, said to that god stationed on the best
of mountains:—"O lord, we are thy devoted servants, command us what we
are to do" (26). He replied to them in words originating from the
mountain:—"If you have compassion for the kine, engage in my worship
from to-day (27). I am your well-meaning first deity who grant all
objects of desire and by my favour you have got, in your possession, ten
millions of precious kine (28). If you all become my votaries, I will
encompass your well-being in the forest and enjoy, as in the celestial
region, in your company (29). Being delighted I will confer on Nanda and
other leading Gopas immense wealth that is worthy of being acquired by
milk-men (30). Let the cows along with their calves circumambulate me. I
will forsooth then attain to highest felicity" (31).

Thereupon to embellish that best of mountains the cows, with all the
bulls, in flocks, encircled it (32). Thereupon with their horns adorned
with garlands and be-decked with chaplets on their heads and flowery
Angadas, numberless cows delightedly began to circumambulate it quickly
(33). Having their limbs pasted with pastes of diverse colors and clad
in red, crimson and yellow raiments the milk-men followed those cows in
order to govern them (34). In that wonderful assembly shone there the
milk-men adorned with peacock-feathered Angadas, and chords well
arranged for tying their hairs and with weapons in their hands. Some
milk-men hastened to control the kine, some danced in joy and some rode
the bulls. Thus in due order when that festivity terminated the
incarnate god of the hill all on a sudden disappeared and Krishna, too,
with the Gopas, returned to Vraja. Thus when the Giri-Yajna was
instituted all the milk-men, boys and elderly people were filled with
surprise, on witnessing that wonderful scene and began to chant the
glories of Madhusudana (35–39).

²²⁷ Gokula is another name of Vraja, the village of milk-men. There is
 still now a village of the same name about five or six miles from
 Mathura. It is very doubtful whether this is the site of the
 ancient Gokula which is described to have been situate near
 Govardhana mountain.

²²⁸ The deity of war and son of Siva. Derived from Kirtika the
 personified Pleiades: according to the legend having been fostered
 and brought up by the nymphs so called. He was so great an adept
 in the art of war that he was appointed the commander of the
 celestial army in the war between the gods and demons.

²²⁹ A sacrifice in honor of the mount Govardhana.

²³⁰ The word in the text is _Udapana_—from _Uda_ water, and the root
 _pa_ to drink. It may also mean a well. Here it means a place
 where water is drunk. Near a well, as is still seen in many place,
 there is a spacious pavement where people may sit at ease and
 drink.

²³¹ Any real vessel made of wood, stone and in the shape of a boat and
 used for holding or pouring out water, as a bathing tub, a bathing
 vessel, a bucket or watering pot &c.