TITLE: THE DESTRUCTION OF KESHI

Vaishampayana said:—Hearing the words of Andha ka, Kansa’s eyes were
reddened with anger. Without giving vent to a single word he entered
into his own house (1). Having their resolution thus frustrated,
Yādavas, well-versed in Srutis, repaired to their respective habitations
talking over the ill-conduct of Kansa (2).

Akrura too, as commanded, and desirous of seeing Krishna, set out for
Mathura in an excellent car fleet like the mind (3). Many good signs
appeared on Krishna’s limbs bespeaking of his union with a father-like
relative (4). Before Akrura’s departure, Ugrasena’s son king Kansa sent
an emissary to Keshi for destroying Krishna (4). Hearing the words of
the messenger, the irrepressible Keshi, always oppressing the people, at
once went to Vrindāvana and began to torture the Gopas (6), Feeding upon
human flesh in anger that dreadful and wicked demon, in the shape of a
horse, began to assail all greatly (7). Killing the cows and cow-herds,
that irrepressible Dānava began to feed on beef of his own accord (8).
Wherever in the forest the vicious-souled Dānava Keshi lived it was
filled with the dead bodies of men and appeared like a cremation ground
(9). He used to scratch the earth with his hoofs, weaken the trees with
his velocity, leap up into the sky and trifle at the wind with his
neighing (10). Thus shaking his manes and ranging in the forest, that
highly proud, foolish and wicked demon, assuming the form of a horse,
began to act there as desired by Kansa (11). Destroying the Gopas, that
horse demon, of wicked deeds, made the forest empty (12). That wicked
one so much vitiated the forest that the Gopas, who derive their
sustenance through woods and the kine left it (13). With his mind worked
up with pride he continually fed on human flesh so much so that the
animals could not wend the forest roads (14).

Once during the day, following in anger the noise of men, that Daity, as
if urged on by Destiny, arrived at the settlement of the milk-men (15).
As soon as they saw him the Gopa-women, with their children, and the
Gopas, setting up a cry, fled away to their master Krishna, the lord of
the universe (16). Hearing the cries of the Gopas and of their women
Krishna promised them safety and went out to meet Keshi (17). Keshi,
too, of powerful course, expanding his eyes and teeth and raising up his
neck, ran towards Krishna with a great sound (18). Seeing the
horse-demon Keshi fall on him Govinda confronted him as a cloud
approaches the moon (19). Beholding Krishna at that time approach Keshi,
the Gopas, endued with human sense, said to him for his well-being (20):

"O child, O Krishna, do thou not all on a sudden approach this wretch of
a horse, for thou art a boy and that one of evil ways is beyond the
power of all (21). This highly powerful Dānava, peerless in battle, is
born with Kansa, and is his life though ranging outward. He is a dread
of the horses and soldiers, cannot be killed by any animal and the
foremost of the sinful" (22–23).

Hearing these words given vent to by the Gopas, Madhusudana, the slayer
of his enemies cherished a desire of fighting with Keshi (24). Thereupon
turning reversely to the southern direction in anger that horse-demon
began to break down the trees with his two feet (25). Then from his long
mouth, the thick manes on his neck and those falling on his forehead
like streams of water began to trickle down drops of perspiration
begotten by anger (26). As the moon pours down dews in the sky during
the winter so from his mouth came out loams produced by the strokes of
reins (27). With neighings coming out of his mouth and foams sent out by
him like dews, he, as if, O Bhārata, sprinkled Mādhava (28). Covered
with yellowish dust resembling powdered Madhuka (panic seed) raised up
by his horns Krishna’s locks became tawny (29). Trotting and leaping and
riving the earth, Keshi, biting his teeth, ran towards Krishna (30).
While engaged in fighting with Krishna, the powerful Dānava Keshi, the
foremost of horses, struck him on the breast with his fore-feet, and
wounded him, of unmitigated prowess, repeatedly with his hoofs (31–32).
Thereupon in anger, with his sharpened teeth, forming the weapons of his
dreadful mouth he bit the upper part of Vāsudeva’s arm (33). At that
time fighting with Krishna, Keshi, with long manes, shone like the sun
in sky united with clouds (34).

With his strength doubled by anger that powerful horse, with great
motion, attempted to strike Krishna on the breast (35). Thereat,
lengthening his arms, Krishna of great prowess, in anger caught hold of
the mouth of that demon. (36). Keshi could not therefore eat up or break
down his arms. On the other hand, his teeth being uprooted and broken
down he began to vomit foamy blood (37). His lips were shattered, his
jaws were smashed, and his eyes were disfigured. They came out all being
disjointed (38). His jaws were broken and his eyes were filled with
blood. Raising up his ears in anger and having his mind agitated he set
forth many an exertion (39). Jumping up again and again with his legs,
he discharged urine and excreta, his hairs were soaked with perspiration
and feet grew motionless (40). Thereupon Krishna’s arm, thrown round
Keshi’s head, shone like a cloud stricken with the rays of the half-moon
after the termination of the rainy season (41). With his limbs wearied
out Keshi too, while engaged in a conflict with Krishna, appeared like
the declining and exhausted moon on the mount Meru in the dawn (42). His
teeth, uprooted by Krishna’s hands, from his mouth fell down like white
autumnal clouds shorn of water (43).

Thereupon when Keshi was greatly worn out with fatigue Krishna,
stretching his hands a good deal, sundered him in twain (44). Thus
smashed down by Krishna, the face of the Dānava Keshi became disfigured
and he began to cry most plaintively (45). All his limbs were shaken and
shattered and blood came out of his mouth. He appeared there,
accordingly, disfigured like a mountain, with a half of it being chopped
off (46). Thus smothered by Krishna’s hands and with his mouth expanded
that highly dreadful Asura fell down like an elephant cut into two
halves (47). The dreadful figure of Kehsi, mutilated by Krishna’s hand,
appeared like a beast slain by Rudra, with trident in his hand (78). His
body being sundered into two equal halves each portion bearing two legs,
half of his back and tail, one eye and one nostril, remained on earth
(49). Krishna’s arms too, wounded by Keshi’s teeth, shone like a growing
palm tree in the forest scratched by an elephant’s tusks (50). Having,
in this wise, slain Keshi in the battle-field and divided his body into
two parts the lotus-eyed Krishna stood there smiling (51). Beholding
Keshi slain, the Gopas and their women, with all their troubles and
weariness gone, were greatly delighted (52). And welcoming the beautiful
Dāmodara according to their respective position and age they honored him
again and again with sweet words (53).

The Gopas said:—"O child, O Krishna, having slain the Daitya, assuming
the form of a horse and ranging on earth—the thorn of people, thou hast
performed an arduous work (54). On this vicious horse being slain by
thee Vrindāvana is now full of auspiciousness and men, animals and birds
are at ease (55). This vicious-minded one has destroyed many of our
milk-men, cows fond of calves and villages (56). Perhaps divesting the
worlds of men this sinful (demon) is about to bring about a universal
dissolution for ranging himself at ease (57). O Krishna, what to speak
of mortal men, even amongst the celestials, one, desirous of living,
cannot stand before him (58)."

Thereupon the Brāhmana Nārada, disappearing from view in the sky, said
"O Vishnu, O god, O Krishna, I am pleased (59). The arduous work, that
you have performed by destroying Krishna, is in thy power and in that of
the three-eyed Deity (Siva) amongst the celestials (60). O my child, my
mind is devoted to thee, and therefore desirous of witnessing this
combat between a man and a horse I have come here from the celestial
region (61). O Govinda, beholding thy deeds as the destruction of Putanā
&c., and this thy present feat I have been highly pleased (68). When
this wicked-minded horse-demon Keshi used to increase his body, even
Mahendra, the slayer of Bali, was stricken with fear (63). With thy
outstretched hands thou hast sundered him. This death was ordained for
him by Brahmā, the root of the universe (64). Listen now to my
declaration, O Vishnu. Since thou hast slain Keshi, thou shalt pass by
the name of Keshava in the world (65). May good betide thee, O Keshava,
I shall soon depart. Thou hast many works still to accomplish and thou
art capable of doing them. Do thou perform them therefore, without any
delay (66). O god, thyself being engaged in another work, other deities,
dependant on thy power, are sporting like men imitating thy feats (67).
The time for the mighty deep of the Bharata war, the battle of the
kings, who are about to repair to the celestial region, is near at hand
(68). Because the kings will repair to the region of Sakra, houses are
being built for them there, the etherial roads are being cleared off and
the cars are being embellished with pennons (69). O Keshava, when
Ugrasena’s son will be killed and thou wilt be in thy position this
terrible and all-destroying war of kings will commence (70). O Mādhava,
unparalleled are thy deeds; therefore at the time of the war the
Pāndavas will seek refuge with thee and thou too shalt espouse their
cause (71). When thou shalt be on the royal throne, undoubtedly the
kings will renounce their most excellent and auspicious prosperity (72),
O Krishna, O lord of the universe, thus I have communicated unto thee
the intelligence of the gods living in the celestial region and of the
universe. Although this history is recorded in Srutis it will become
famous in the world (73). O lord, I have witnessed thy deeds and have
seen thee. I now depart and shall return when Kansa will be slain" (74).

Saying this Nārada wended the etherial way. And hearing the words of
Nārada, proficient in celestial music, the Gopas too, along with
Krishna, repaired to Vraja (75–76).