TITLE: RASA DANCE

Vaishampayana said:—Thereupon after the departure of Sakra, the
beautiful Krishna the holder of Gavardhana, entered Vraja honored by the
inhabitants, thereof (1). The elderly Gopas and his kinsmen and
comrades, assembled together, welcomed him and said.

"O Govinda, we have been honored and favoured by thy conduct and as well
as that of the best of mountains (2). Indeed thy prowess is like that of
the celestials. By thy favour the kine have tided over the fear of
excessive rain and we too have been relieved of the great fear (3). O
Krishna, O lord of kine, beholding thy superhuman feat of raising up the
mountain we consider thee as a divinity (4). O thou of great strength,
art thou Rudra, Marut, or one of the Vasus? Why hast thou taken thy
birth as the son of Vasudeva (5)? Beholding this thy low birth amongst
us, this thy prowess, sport and feat in thy boyhood our minds are filled
with fear (6). We see, thou art like one of the Lokapālas. But why art
thou, in thy wretched guise of a milk-man, engaged in sport with us and
in protecting kine (7)? Art thou a Deva, a Dānava or a Gandharva now
born as our friend? Whatever thou mayst be we bow unto thee (8). If thou
art present here, of thy own accord, for any work of thine, do thou
consider us as thy dependants and votaries (9)."

Vaishampāyana said:—Hearing the words of Gopas, the lotus-eyed Krishna,
smiling a little, said to his assembled kinsmen:—(10)

"Ye of dreadful prowess, let not the conviction, that you have all
formed about me, take root in your hearts. I am one of your clan and a
friend (11). If however you are all bent upon hearing then wait you will
soon listen to an account of (my origin) and see my true form (12). I am
one of your respected friends like unto a god. If you have any affection
for me, do not wish to learn any thing more about me (13)."

Thus accosted by Vasudeva’s son and covering their own faces and
resorting to silence the milk-men went away in in various directions
(14).

Thereupon beholding the charming autumnal night and the beautiful moon
the powerful Krishna felt a desire of sporting (15). Sometimes he made
the haughty bulls fight with one another in the roads of Vraja adorned
with cow-dung pastes. He again set the powerful cow-herds against one
another. He sometimes got hold of the kine in the forest like a
crocodile. (16–17). Sometimes thinking of his boyhood and bringing the
youthful women of Gopas under his control at night he used to enjoy
there (18). With their glances those Gopa women used to drink as if the
ambrosia of his beautiful face who was like the moon come down on earth
(19). Krishna was by nature beautiful but clad in a silken raiment of
shining yellow colour he appeared more beautiful (20). Having his arms
adorned with Angadas and bedecked with garlands of wild flowers Govinda
beautified the entire Vraja (21). Filled with surprise at witnessing the
wonderful conduct of that powerful (being) the beautiful Gopa women used
to call him by the name of Dāmodara (22). And casting again and again
their glances accompanied by various gestures they began to assail him
with their rising breasts (23). After a few days had passed away in this
way the parents of those milk-women prevented them (from doing so).
Those damsels however, fond of amusements, used to hunt Krishna at night
(24). Sometimes arranging themselves in rows and sometimes in circles
they, singing hymns relating to Krishna’s glories, used to satisfy him.
And all of them appeared in pairs with Krishna (25). Casting loving
glances at Krishna and following his course those youthful damsels of
Vraja imitated all his sports (26). Sometimes striking their palms in
the forest they used to imitate him and sometimes they used to take
delight in imitating his songs and dances accompanied by lovely smiles
and looks (27-28). Singing sweet songs describing the profuse love for
Krishna these beautiful women, devoted to Dāmodara, used to range at
Pleasure in Vraja (29). As she-elephants, covered with dust, enjoy with
an infuriated elephant so those milk-women, their limbs covered all over
with dust and cow-dung, used to sport with Krishna encircling him on all
sides (30). Drinking repeatedly his ambrosia-like beauty with their eyes
accompanied by side-long and smiling looks the Gopa-women, having
antelope eyes, could not attain to the consummation of delight (31).
When Damodara used to exclaim "O! Alas!" the damsels anxiously and
delightedly used to listen to the words given vent to by him (33). Thus
encircled by the milk-women Krishna used to sport, of his own accord, in
the autumnal night adorned by the moon²⁴⁴ (35).

²⁴⁴ This is one of the principal incidents of Krishna’s life on which
 innumerable poets of India have exhausted their skill and
 ingenuity. This incident has also been recorded in several
 Puranas. Some hostile critics interpret this Rāsa dance as one of
 the blemishes of Krishna’s character and proceed to prove that he
 was an emblem of carnality. They draw upon certain Indian scholars
 in support of their argument. It is therefore necessary to throw a
 few suggestions before our readers so that they may understand Sri
 Krishna aright. This _Rāsa_ dance is described in a few words in
 Harivamsha, a little more profusely in Vishnu Puran, but very
 elaborately in Srimadbhagavatam. There is no mention however to
 this incident in the Mahabharata. In Vishnu Puran it is described
 as the out-burst of a tender love of a number of young girls for
 their youthful companion. In Harivamsha it is the love of youthful
 damsels for a handsome young man. In Bhagvata it is the passionate
 love of some women for a young man. In all these books however the
 different phases of love have been described with a grand esoteric
 meaning behind them. This Rāsa was nothing but a "Ball" dance in
 which all the youthful damsels and girls took part and which was
 introduced by Krishna. It was a favourite pastime with the Aryans
 and frequent references to this dance are seen in Mahabharata and
 other classical works of note. That it was a purely innocent
 amusement freed from every shade of carnality is beyond all
 doubts. From the internal evidences of the three great works on
 Krishna’s life, namely Harivamsa, Vishnu Purana and
 Srimadbhagavatam it is evident that Krishna, at this period, was
 merely a boy of ten years of age or so. It is impossible for a boy
 of this tender age to be so very carnal as he is depicted to have
 been. All the youthful maidens and girls of Vraja were fond of
 Krishna. It was not only on them that he exercised his wonderful
 influence but he did so on the elderly men too. This is clear
 enough from the incident that he succeeded in suppressing the
 great Indra-yajna. Krishna used to invent and organise varions
 sorts of sports for his comrades, both boys and girls. In the
 previous Chapter his wonderful influence over his male companions
 and elderly men has been described. This Chapter is introduced by
 the poet to show that his influence over the women was equally
 marvellous. All these incidents go to prove more his super human
 origin. In all these three works no mention is made of the name of
 a particular woman for whom he cherished a special fancy as
 _Radha_. There is a occasional mention of this word in Bhagavat
 and only once in Harivamsha where it means a worshipper. This
 story of the carnal love of Krishna for his various companions is
 described at a length in _Brahma Vaivarta Purana_ which is
 regarded as a spurious production and is not considered as an
 authentic record of his life. The esoteric meaning underlying this
 incident is the union between the human soul and the Supreme Soul.
 Krishna is the impersonation of the Supreme Soul and _Radha_ or
 the worshipper is the emblem of the human soul. The worshipper can
 secure unification with the Supreme Soul by love—earnest and
 deep-seated devotion. This love, this devotion has been described
 by various poets in various forms.