TITLE: AN ACCOUNT OF THE BIRTH OF DEMONS

Vaishampayana said:—Thereupon worked up with anger Kansa said to all his
well-meaning ministers:—"Do ye always be on your guard for destroying
the (eight born) children of Devaki (1). The calamity, which we suspect,
should be eradicated. Therefore from the very beginning destroy all the
embryos of Devaki (2). Let Devaki, well guarded in the inner appartment
by the warders, range there confidently. And when she conceives keep her
with care (3). As soon as she will conceive, the women of my harem will
count the months from the very first, and being informed of the time of
delivery we will do what we think proper (4). Let Vasudeva too be kept
unconsciously day and night in the inner appartment by eunuchs and women
engaged in my well being. Let no body disclose to him the secret (5).
With these human efforts people should accomplish their objects. Hear
how persons like me avert the course of destiny (6). Even an adverse
destiny is made propitious by well employed _mantras_, properly
administered medicines, care and devotion (7)."

Vaishampāyana continued:—Hearing from Nārada, the account of his death,
Kansa, out of fear, began to hold counsels as to how he should destroy
Devaki’s embryo (8). On the other hand, being informed of the portendous
and dreadful efforts of Kansa while out of sight, the powerful Vishnu
began to think (9) "Bhoja’s descendant Kansa will destroy the first
seven children of Devaki. In her eighth conception I shall have to live
in her womb" (10). While thus meditating his mind flew where the
Saragarbha Danavas, by name, Hansa, Suvikrātha, Damana, Ripunardana, and
Krodhahartā were living in the water (11). These immortal-like
Saragarbhas, the sons of Kālanemi, were powerful like the celestials,
were of effulgent persons and experts in battle (12). Leaving their own
grand-father Hiranyakasipu and wearing mantted locks those Saragarbha
Daityas worshipped the Grand-father of all, Brahmā, with hard penances
who, being pleased, conferred on them the following boon (13-14).

Brahma said:—"O ye foremost of Dānavas, I have been greatly pleased with
your ascetic austerities. Express to me clearly your wishes, I shall
grant them to you all." (15). Encouraged by Brahmā’s words the Daityas
said "O lord, if thou art pleased with us do thou confer upon us this
best of boons. O Brahman, if thou art ready to confer upon us a boon, do
thou grant us such a one as may render us unslayable by the gods, the
huge Uragas, Yakshas, Gandharvas, Siddhas, Chāranas, men and by the
great Rishis ever engaged in penances, whose weapons are their curses"
(16–18).

The Grand-father was greatly delighted at heart with their ascetic
observances and therefore affectionately said to them:—"What you have
prayed for will all be accomplished." Having conferred this boon on
Saragarbhas the self-born repaired to the celestial region.

Thereupon Hiranyakasipu addressed them in angry words saying (19–20).
"By your disregarding me and praying for a boon to the lotus-sprung
Brahmā, you have become my enemies. I therefore have no affection for
you and forsake you all. That father, who has given you the high
sounding name of _Saragarbha_, will kill you all while in embryo
(21–22.) O ye great Asuras Saragarbhas, you all six will be born in
order from Devaki and Kansa will kill you (23)."

Vaishampayana said:—Thereupon repairing to the nether region Vishnu
arrived where Saragarbha Asuras, on account of the imprecation of
Hiranyakasipu, were living in the womb of water. He saw them lying there
possessed by death-like sleep (24–25). Thereupon entering into the body
of the Saragarbhas in a state of dream, Vishnu, having truth for his
prowess, caught hold of their vital breaths and consigned them to the
care of sleep. He said "O sleep, by my command take the vital airs of
all these leading Dānavas Saragarbhas and place them in order in the
womb of Devaki (26-28). They will be born of her womb and proceed to the
abode of Death. Kansa’s efforts will be baffled and Devaki’s labour will
be crowned with success (29). I will show you such a favour that like me
you will be powerful on earth and adored of all creatures (30).
Thereupon when my gentle portion will be conceived by Devaki in her
seventh conception, take that eldest brother of mine in the seventh
month and place him within Rohini’s womb (31). On account of his thus
being taken away from the womb, that moon-like elder brother of mine
will pass, in his youth, by the name of Sangkarsana (32). Thereupon
thinking that ’Devaki has untimely given birth to a child out of fear in
the seventh time’ Kansa will be very careful for the eighth time when I
will be in her womb (33). O goddess, may you fare-well; as being the
ninth of our race, you will be conceived by Yashodā, the best of
milk-women, the most beloved wife of Nanda the master of Kansa’s kine.
You will be born on the ninth day of the dark half of the month (34–35).
I too, in the middle of the night under the influence of Abhijit,¹⁸⁷
will come out happily of the womb (36). O sleep, highly dreadful is
Kansa’s rule. Therefore in the eighth month, we will be simultaneously
born (and exchanged by Vasudeva) (37). I will be taken to Yashodā and
you will be taken to Devaki. By this our interchange Kansa will be
stupified (38). Then taking you by the leg he will dash you against a
stone; you will then at once go up to the sky and attain to your eternal
region (39). O goddess, there the effulgence of your face will be like
that of Sangkarshana and your body will be dark-blue like mine and your
arms will be as huge as those of mine (40). O sleep, when armed with an
uplifted mace of three heads, and with a dagger of golden handles, when
with a cup full of wine and a clean lotus, when adorned with a blue
raiment and a yellow cloth thrown round your breast, you will occupy the
road of the celestials, your breast will adorned with a necklace shining
like the rays of the moon, your two ears will be adorned with two
celestial _Kundalas_ and your countenance will shine like the moon
(41-43). O goddess, adorned, at my command, with a wonderful crown and
hair nets, with flags of peacock feather and _Angadas_, embellishing the
ten quarters, with your dreadful arms resembling the serpents, encircled
by terrible goblins and observing the vow of celibacy you will enter
into the celestial region (44–46). When you will reach the land of gods,
the thousand-eyed Indra will confer upon you the dignity of a god by
sprinkling you with water according to the rules laid down by me and
accept you as his sister. Having been adopted in the family of Kushika
you will pass by the name of Koushika (47–48). Afterwards when Vāsava
will assign to you the mount Vindhyā for your habitation you will adorn
the world with thousand provinces (49). On whomever on earth you will
bestow a boon while ranging of your own accord in the three worlds, he
will at once attain to the fruit thereof (50). O goddess, there thinking
of me in your mind, and starting with the goblins you will kill the two
demons Shumbha and Nishumbha living in mountain, with all their
attendants (51). O sleep, you are greatly fond of an offering of meat.
You will therefore, on a _Navami_,¹⁸⁸ receive, on earth, worship
accompanied by the sacrifice of beasts (52). Children or wealth, it will
not be difficult to acquire any of these for him, who, amongst men
cognizant of my prowess, will bow unto you (53). You will save them all
from danger, those who will be tired in a huge forest, those who will be
drowned in a mighty deep, those who will be attacked by robbers (54). O
auspicious lady, I will not kill him who will propitiate you with
devotion nor will he meet with ruin at my hands (55)".

¹⁸⁷ One of the _Nakshatras_ or lunar asterisms.

¹⁸⁸ The ninth day of the dark half of the month.