TITLE: THE BIRTH OF THE DAITYAS

Vaishampayana said:—After Nārāyana, on his being successful, had
repaired to a house on the earth becoming his position, after the gods
had incarnated their portions in the race of Bharata, after the portions
of Dharma, Indra, Pavana, the celestial physicians the two Aswinis, and
the sun had descended on earth, after the priest, of the gods, had come
down on earth, in a portion of his, after the eighth portion of Vasus
had come down on earth, after the portion of Death, Kali had been on
earth, after the portion of Sukra, Varuna, Sankara, Mitra, Kuvera,
Gandharvas, Uragas and Yakshas had come down earth Nārada came out of a
portion of Nārāyana’s energy¹⁸⁰ (1-6). He was effulgent like fire, had
eyes like the rising sun and had huge and all-spreading matted locks. He
wore a raiment white like the rays of the moon and was adorned with
golden ornaments (7). He carried a big _Vina_¹⁸¹ like a female companion
always confined in room, had an antelope skin thrown on his body and a
sacred thread made of gold. With a staff and _Kamandalu_¹⁸² in his hands
he appeared like second Sakra (8). That great sage always used to pick
up quarrels, was learned, well-read in _Gandharva-Veda_¹⁸³ and was
capable of deciphering the secret cause of dissensions in this world.
That Brāhmana used to create enemies of his own accord and was like the
second Kali himself. That great Muni was the first speaker in the land
of gods and Gandharvas, was the chanter of the four Vedas and was the
reciter of the first Rik. That immortal sage Nārada, ever ranging in the
region of Brahmā, with a depressed heart said to Vishnu in the midst of
the assembled gods. "O Nārāyana, useless have been the incarnations of
the gods for the destruction of the kings (9-13). O lord of the
celestial region, thyself existing here, this dissension of the kings
will be productive of no fruit. Methinks their work cannot be
accomplished without Nārāyana’s Yoga (14). O god of gods, thou art wise
and observant of the true essence of things. It has not been proper for
thee to institute such a work for the earth (15). Thou art the vision of
the eyes and the lord of the powerful. Thou art the foremost of the
Yogins and the refuge of all (16). Beholding the incarnation of the gods
on earth why didst not thou send, first of all, a portion of thy energy
to relieve the earth of her burden? (17). Making thee their help, and
being identical with and guided by thee all the gods will swim on this
earth from one action to another (18). I have therefore hastened to the
presence of these assembled gods to send thee, O Vishnu; hear the reason
thereof (19). O Nārāyana, hear of the movements of those Daityas who,
amongst many that had been slain by thee in the war of which Tārakā was
the root, have gone to the face of the earth (20). There is a delightful
city on the face of the earth by name Mathurā. It is situate on the bank
of Yamunā and abounds in many prosperous, villages. There was a great
Dānava, irrepressible in battle, by name Madhu. He was highly powerful
and a terror to all creatures (21–22). There was a vast and dreadful
forest by name Madhu abounding in huge trees where he used to live
formerly (23). The great Dānava Lavana was Madhu’s son. He was gifted
with profuse strength and was a terror to all creatures (24). Sporting
there for many years, that Dānava, elated with pride, terrorized all the
gods and others (26). When the pious son of Dasharatha, Rāma, a terror
to the Rākshasas, was ruling in Ayodhya, that Dānava, eulogised by all
the Daityas, repaired to a dreadful forest. Lavana despatched to Rāma, a
harsh-speeched emissary. He said ’O Rāma, I am living near your
territory. The Dānava Lavana is your enemy. The kings do not wish to
have a powerful enemy (26–28). A king, who seeks the well-being of his
subjects, observes his royal duties and wishes to multiply his
territories and riches, should always defeat his enemies (29). That
king, desirous of pleasing his subjects, who has his hairs wet with the
water of installation,¹⁸⁴ should first of all conquer his senses, for
mastery over senses is the sure victory (30), The king, who wishes to
keep his position always intact and strong, should instruct his men in
moral laws for there is no other preceptor like him to the people (31).
If when placed in the midst of dangers and vices, an intelligent king
strengthens himself by his army he is not to entertain any fear of his
enemies (32). All men are killed by their senses, the powerful enemies
born with them. An impatient king is slain by the false notion of good
done to them by their enemies (33). On account of your wife, you have,
out of foolish attachment, killed Rāvana with his army. I do not
consider that sinful action of yours as great and becoming (34). Living
in a forest and observing a vow you have killed a mean Rakshasa. Such a
conduct is not seen in the pious (35). Virtue, begotten of forbearance,
takes the pious to an auspicious and righteous station. Out of ignorance
you have killed Rāvana and honoured the forest ranging Vanaras¹⁸⁵ (36).
Indeed Rāvana is blessed, since you, while observing a vow, killed him
in battle for your wife, in pursance of the conduct of ordinary men
(37). That wicked-minded Rāvana, who has not controlled his senses, has
been killed by you in battle. You are therefore capable of fighting.
Come and fight with me to-day’ (38).

"Hearing those words of that harsh-speeched emissary, Rāma, out of
forbearance, smilingly said to him:—’O Emissary, what you have said, out
of honor to that night-ranger, is unfair, since you have been blaming me
and considering yourself at ease (39–40). What is there to blame, if,
wending the ways of righteousness, I have been stupified, if Rāvana has
been slain and my wife has been carried away (41), The virtuous, always
following the ways of morality, do not blame others even with their
words. As the God is always awake for the pious, He is equally so for
the wicked (42), You have done what is the duty of a messenger. Go now
and make no delay. Persons like me do not hurt the mean: who are fond of
making too much of themselves (43). Here is my younger brother
Satrughna, the repressor of enemies in battle. He will wait for that
wicked-minded demon (44).’ Thus addressed by Rāma and commanded by that
king that messenger set out with Satrughna. Ascending upon a
quick-coursing car, Sumitra’s son Satrughna repaired to the huge forest
of Madhu and desirous of entering into a battle pitched a tent there
(45–46).

"Thereupon hearing the words of that messenger the demon Lavana was
beside himself with anger. Leaving behind the Madhu forest he started
for battle. Then there took place a terrible encounter between Satrughna
and Lavana. They were both heroic and mighty bowmen. Both of them struck
each other with sharpened arrows. None of them fled back from the
battle-field and none of them felt himself tired (47-49).

"Thereupon greatly assailed in battle by Satrughna’s shafts the Dānava
Lavana met with discomfiture for he had not his mace with him (50).
Afterwards taking up a celestial Sankhusha, that was given to him as a
boon and was capable of grinding all creatures, Lavana began to shout in
the battle (51). He caught of hold Satrughna’s turban with it and began
to draw in Rāghava’s younger brother (52). Thereat taking up a most
excellent dagger having a golden handle Satrughna cut off with it
Lavana’s head in that great battle (52). Having slain that demon Lavana
in battle, that heroic son of Sumitra, who gives delight to his friends,
cleared off his forest with his weapons (54). Having cleared that forest
that pious son of Sumitrā, Satrughna, built a city there for the
well-being of that province and desired to live there. Having killed, in
the days of yore, the demon Lavana in Mudhu forest Setrughna built a
city there by name Mathurā (55–56). That great city was adorned with
walls, gate ways and doors. It contained many villages, high buildings
and gardens. Its boundaries were well laid and it was beautifully built.
The walls were very high. The ditches were like the ornament that a
woman uses round her waist. The buildings, made of stone and bricks,
were like Keyuras. Beautiful palaces were like the ear-rings. The
well-protected gates were like the veils and the prominades were like
smiles. It contained many healthy heroes, elephants, horses and cars. It
resembled a crescent and was situate on the bank of Yamuna. It contained
beautiful markets and was proud of her collection of jems. The fields
there were full of corns. The king of gods (Indra) used to pour showers
in proper season. Men and women there were always delightful. The highly
powerful king Surasena, born in the race of Bhojas, reigned there. He
was powerful like Mahāsena and was celebrated by the name of Ugrasena
(57–63).

"He whom thou hast killed, O Vishnu, is his son. The Daitya, by name
Kālanemi, whom thou didst slay in the battle of which Tāraka was the
root, is born as Kansa, and is the scion of the Bhoja race. That king,
who treads like a lion, is celebrated in the world (64–65). He is a
terror to all the kings of the world and a dread to all creatures. He is
always beyond the path of righteousness (66). He is highly persevering
and ruthless. He is so very haughty to his subjects that seeing him
their hairs stand erect (67). He never observes his royal duties and is
never a source of pleasure to his own men. He never does any good to his
kingdom and behaves always like a tyrant (68). He, who was vanquished by
thee in Tāraka battle, is now born as Kansa in the Bhoja race. That one,
living on meat, is oppressing all the worlds, with his demonaic heart
(69). He, who was like a horse and known by the name, Hayagriva, is born
as Keshi the youngest brother of Kansa (70). That wicked bodiless demon
with manes, neighing like a horse, is now living alone in Vrindāvana. He
lives on human flesh (71). Bali’s son Aristha is born as the great Asura
Kakudmi, capable of assuming forms of his own accord. Adopting the form
of a bull he has become an enemy of the kine (72). Diti’s son Ristha,
the foremost of Danavas, is born as Kansa’s elephant (73). That dreadful
demon Lamva is born as Pralamva. He is living under a fig-tree by name
Bhandara (74). That demon, who was known by the name of Khara, is born
as the dreadful Asura Dhanuka. Living in the forest of palm-trees he is
making a havoc of creatures (75). Those two foremost of Danavas, by name
Varaha and Kishora, have been born as wrestlers Chanuka and Musthika who
are always at the arena (76). Those two Danavas Maya and Tara, who were
like death even to the demons, are now living in the city of Bhumi’s son
Naraka, by name Prāgyotish (77).

"O Nārāyana, thou didst slay all these Danavas and divest them of their
forms. Assuming human bodies they are now oppressing the people of the
world (78). They oppose the chanting of thy name and destroy thy
votaries. By thy favour only they will meet with destruction (79). In
heaven they are afraid of thee, in ocean they are afraid of thee and
even on earth they afraid of thee. There is no other source of fear to
them (80). O Sridhar, thou dost slay the wicked Dānavas; none else can
accomplish their destruction. The Daityas, who are sent away from
heaven, find refuge on earth (81).

"O Keshava, thou being awake, it is difficult for that demon to go again
to heaven, who, on his being slain in the celestial region, again rises
up assuming a human body (82). Therefore, O Nārāyana, do thou come to
the world. We are also descending on earth. Do thou create your own self
for the destruction of Dānavas (83). The forms of thine, which are not
manifest, are both visible and invisible to the celestials. In those
forms, the gods, created by thee, shall descend on earth (84).

"O Vishnu, when thou shalt come down on earth, Kansa will not be able to
reign and the object, for which the earth has come, will also be
accomplished (85). Thou art the preceptor of all works in the land of
Bharata, thou art the eye of all and the supreme refuge. Therefore, O
Hrishikesha do thou come on earth and slay those wicked Dānavas (86)".

¹⁸⁰ Dharma’s incarnation was Yudhishthira, Sakra’s was Arjuna and
 Pavana’s was Bhimasena. The two Aswinis incarnated themselves as
 Nakula and Sahadeva. The sun incarnated himself as Karna, the
 priest of the gods Vrihaspati as Drona, the eighth Vasu as
 Bhishma, death as Vidura, Kali as Duryodhana, Soma as Abhimanyu,
 Sukra as Bhurisrava, Varuna as Srutayudha, Sankara as Ashwathama,
 Mitra as Kanika, Kuvera as Dhritarashtra. The Gandharva and others
 incarnated themselves as Ugrasena, Dushasana and others.

¹⁸¹ A stringed musical instrument.

¹⁸² A vessel to carry water.

¹⁸³ The art of music. This was the special gift of the Gandharvas.

¹⁸⁴ The usual practice is that at the time of installation sacred
 water is sprinkled on the head of a king. The meaning is that who
 has gone through the ceremony of installation.

¹⁸⁵ Properly speaking they were not monkeys but a barbarous race
 living in a province of the Southern India.

CHAPTER L.V. VISHNU’S REPLY.

Vaishampayana said:—Hearing the words of Nārada the Lord Madhusudana,
the master of gods, smilingly said in auspicious words (1):—"O Nārada,
listen to a proper reply to all these words which you have addressed to
me for the well-being of the three worlds (2). It is known to me that
all these Dānavas, assuming human forms, have been born on earth (3). I
know too that Kansa is born as the son of Ugrasena on earth. I know also
that Keshi is born as a horse (4). I know also the elephant
Kuvalayapida, the wrestlers Chānura and Mushthika and the demon Arishtha
in the shape of a bull (5). Khara and the great Asura Pralamva are also
known to me. Bali’s daughter Putanā is also well known to me (6). I know
also Kāliya who is living in the lake of Yamunā and who has entered
there in fear of Vinatā’s son¹⁸⁶ (7). I know also Jarāsandha who is the
head of all kings; and the demon Naraka, who is living in the city of
Prāgyotish, is also very well-known to me (8). In the city of Shonitpura
on earth Bāna is born as a man. That energetic and haughty demon, of
thousand arms, is invincible even unto the gods. I know also that the
great charge of Bhāratvarsa lies with me (9-10). I know also how all
these kings will disappear. The destruction of those danavas, in human
forms, who never come back from battle-field and the rejoicing of the
region of Sakra has also been seen by me (11). For myself and for others
I shall enter into Yoga. Going to the region of men and assuming a human
form I shall bring about the destruction of all those mighty demons
headed by Kansa. I shall slay him by that means by which he will enjoy
peace (12–13). By my Yoga I shall resort to all these means. It is my
incumbent duty to destroy all those enemies of the gods in battle (14).
I shall kill the foes of all those great ones who have sacrificed
themselves on behalf of the earth, of all those gods, Rishis and
Gandharvas who have come down on earth at my behest (15). O Nārada, I
have already formed this resolution. Let the grand-father Brahmā make a
house there for me (16). O grand-father, do thou relate to me, how, born
in what country and living in what house I shall kill them (17)".

Brahma said:—O lord, O Nārāyana, hear from me of that key to success and
who your parents will be on earth (18). In order to glorify their family
you will be born in the race of Yādavas (19). Eradicating these Asuras
for good and multiplying your great family you will establish the orders
of mankind. Hear from me about this (20).

O Nārāyana, in the days of yore, in the great sacrifice of the
high-souled Varuna, Kashyapa stole away all the cows giving milk for the
sacrifice (21). Kashyapa had two wives, Aditi and Surabhi who did not
wish to accept the kine from Varuna (24). Thereupon coming to me and
bowing with his head down Varuna said "O revered one, the preceptor has
stolen away all my kine (23). Having accomplished his object, even, O
father, he has not ordered the return of those kine. He is under the
control of his two wives Aditi and Surabhi (24). O lord, all those my
kine give heavenly and eternal milk whenever wished. Protected by their
own power they range in the seas (25). They perpetually yeild milk like
unto the ambrosia of gods. Save Kashyapa there is none else who can
charm them (26). O Brahmā, a master, a preceptor or whoever he may be if
one goes astray thou dost control him. Thou art our supreme refuge (27).
O preceptor of the world, if punishment is not meted out to powerful
persons who do not know their own work, then the order of the world will
not exist (28). Thou art omnipotent and lord of all. Do thou give me my
kine, I will go then to the ocean (29). These kine are my soul—they are
my endless strength. Of all thy creation the kine and the Brāhmanas are
the eternal sources of energy (30). First of all the kine should be
saved. When they are saved they protect the Brāhmanas. The world is
upheld by the protection of the kine and Brāhmanas" (31).

O Achyuta, thus addressed by Varuna, the king of water, and being truly
informed of the pilfering of the kine I imprecated a curse on Kashyapa
(32). With that portion, in which the high-souled Kashyapa stole the
kine, he will be born as a milkman on earth (33). His two wives Surabhi
and Aditi, who are like pieces of wood for the birth of gods, will also
go with him (34). Being born as a milkman with them he will live there
happily. That portion of Kashyapa, equally powerful like himself, will
pass by the name of Vasudeva and will live amongst the kine on earth.
Near Mathurā there is a mountain by name Govardhana (35-36). Paying
tribute to Kansa he lives there being attached to kine. His two wives
Aditi and Surabhi are born as the two wives of Vasudeva by name Devaki
and Rohini. Being born there as a boy having all the characteristics of
a milkman he there grew up as thou didst do before in thy form with
three footsteps. Then covering thyself with the form (of Yoga), O
Madhusudana, do thou go there for the well-being of the world. With
exclamations of thy victory and benediction all these gods are welcoming
thee. Descending on earth and taking thy birth from Rohini and Devaki do
thou please them. Thousands of milk maids will also cover the earth
(37-42). O Vishnu, when thou shalt range in the forest tending kine they
will see thy beautiful form adorned with garlands of wild flowers (43).
O thou having eyes like lotus petals, O large-armed Nārāyana, when thou
wilt go as a boy to the villages of milkmen all people will become boys
(44). O thou having lotus eyes, being milkmen with their minds devoted
to thee all thy votaries will help thee; tending kine in the forest,
running in pastures and bathing in the water of Yamunā they will acquire
a great attachment for thee. And Vasudeva’s life will be a blessed one
(45–46). Thou wilt address him as thy father and he will address thee as
his son. Save Kashyapa whom else canst thou accept as thy father (47)? O
Vishnu, save Aditi who else can conceive thee? Therefore by thy
self-begotten Yoga do thou proceed for victory, O Madhusudana. We too
repair to our respective habitations (48).

Vaishampāyana said:—Having ordered the gods to repair to the celestial
region the Lord Vishnu went to his own abode on the northern side of the
ocean of milk (49). In this quarter there is a cave of the mount Sumeru
difficult of being trodden, which is worshipped with his three
foot-steps during the solistice (60). Having left there, in the cave,
his old body the omnipotent and intelligent Hari despatched his soul to
the house of Vasudeva (61).

¹⁸⁶ Garuda who used to eat up serpents.