“Dhritarashtra said, ‘After the ruler of the Sindhus had been slain in
battle by Savyasachin and after the fall of Bhurisravas, what became the
state of your mind? After Drona also had been thus addressed by
Duryodhana in the midst of the Kurus, what did the preceptor say unto him
then? Tell me all this, O Sanjaya!’

“Sanjaya said, ‘Loud wails arose among thy coops, O Bharata, after the
slaughter of Bhurisravas and the ruler of the Sindhus. All of them
disregarded the counsels of thy son, those counsels in consequence of
which leaders of men, by hundreds, were slain. As regards Drona, hearing
those words of thy son, he became filled with grief. Reflecting for a
short while, O monarch, he said these words in great affliction.

“‘Drona said, “O Duryodhana, why dost thou pierce me thus with wordy
shafts? I told thee before that Arjuna is incapable of defeat in battle.
Protected by the diadem-decked Arjuna, Sikhandin slew Bhishma. By that
feat, O thou of Kuru’s race, the prowess of Arjuna in battle hath been
well-tested. Beholding Bhishma who was incapable of being defeated by the
gods and the Danavas, actually slain in battle, even then I knew that
this Bharata host is doomed. Upon the fall of him whom of all persons in
the three worlds, we had regarded to be the very foremost of heroes, who
else is there upon whom we are to rely? Those dice, O sire, with which
Sakuni formerly played in the Kuru assembly, were not dice but keen
arrows capable of slaying foes. Even those arrows, O sire, sped by Jaya,
are now slaying us. Though Vidura characterised them to be such, thou
didst not yet understand them to be so. Those words, again, that the wise
and high-souled Vidura, with tears in his eyes had then said unto thee,
those auspicious words recommending peace, thou didst not then hear. That
calamity which foretold hath now come. That frightful carnage, O
Duryodhana, hath now come as the result of that disobedience by thee of
Vidura’s words. That man of foolish understanding who, disregarding the
salutary words of trusted friends, followeth his own opinion, soon falls
into a pitiable plight. O son of Gandhari, this great evil, viz., that
dragging in our very sight to the Kuru assembly of Krishna who never
deserved such treatment, who hath been born in a noble race, and who
practiseth every virtue. Know that all this is but little, for in the
next world dire consequences yet will be thine. Vanquishing the Pandavas
at dice by deceit, thou hadst sent them, into the woods, attired in
deer-skins. What other Brahmana, except myself, in this world, would seek
to injure those princes that are ever engaged in the practice of virtue
and that are to me even as my own sons. With the approval of
Dhritarashtra, in the midst of the Kuru assembly, thou hadst, with Sakuni
as thy help-mate, provoked the ire of the Pandavas. United with
Duhsasana, Karna then fanned that wrath. Disregarding the words of
Vidura, thou hast repeatedly fanned it thyself. With resolute care, all
of you had surrounded Arjuna, resolved to stand by the ruler of the
Sindhus. Why then have all of you been vanquished and why also has
Jayadratha been slain? Why, when thou art alive, and Karna, and Kripa,
and Salya, and Aswatthaman, O Kauravya, hath the ruler of the Sindhus
been slain? For rescuing the ruler of the Sindhus, the kings (on thy
side) had put forth all their fierce energy. Why, then, hath Jayadratha
been slain in their midst? Relying upon me, king Jayadratha had expected
his rescue from the hands of Arjuna. He, however, obtained not the rescue
he had expected. I do not also see my safety for my own self. Until I
succeed in slaying the Panchalas with Sikhandin, I feel like one sinking
in the Dhristadyumna-mire. Having failed, O Bharata, in rescuing the
ruler of the Sindhus, why dost thou pierce me thus with thy wordy shafts,
seeing that I too am burning with grief? Thou seest not any longer on the
field the gold standards of Bhishma of sure aim, that warrior who was
never tired in battle. How, then, canst thou hope for success? When the
rulers of the Sindhus and Bhurisravas also have been slain in the very
midst of so many mighty car-warriors, what do you think, will the end be?
Kripa, difficult of being vanquished, is still alive, O king! That he
hath not followed in the track of Jayadratha, I applaud him highly for
this! When I saw Bhishma himself, that achiever of the most difficult
feats (in battle), that warrior who was incapable of being slain in
battle by the gods with Vasava at their head, slain in thy sight, O
Kaurava, as also of thy younger brother Duhsasana, I thought then, O
king, that the Earth hath abandoned thee. Yonder the troops of the
Pandavas and the Srinjayas, united together, are now rushing against me.
For achieving thy good in battle, O son of Dhritarashtra, I will not
without slaying all the Panchalas, put off my armour. O king, go and tell
my son Aswatthaman who is present in battle that even at the risk of his
life he should not let the Somakas alone.[186] Thou shouldst also tell
him, ‘Observe all the instructions thou hast received from thy father. Be
firm in acts of humility, in self-restraint, in truth and righteousness.
Observant of religion, profit, and pleasure, without neglecting religion
and profit, thou shouldst always accomplish those acts in which religion
predominates. The Brahmanas should always be gratified with presents. All
of them deserve thy worship. Thou shouldst never do anything that is
injurious to them. They are like flames of fire.’ As regards myself, I
will penetrate the hostile host, O slayer of foes, for doing great
battle, pierced as I am by thee with thy wordy shafts. If thou canst, O
Duryodhana, go and protect those troops. Both the Kurus and the Srinjayas
have been angry. They will fight even during the night.” Having said
these words, Drona proceeded against the Pandavas and set himself to
over-ride the energy of the Kshatriyas like the sun overshadowing the
light of the stars.’”

SECTION CLI

“Sanjaya said, ‘Thus urged by Drona, king Duryodhana, filled with rage
set his heart on battle. And thy son, Duryodhana, then said unto Karna,
“Behold, the diadem-decked son of Pandu, with Krishna alone for helpmate,
penetrated into the array formed by the preceptor, an array that the gods
themselves could not pierce, and in the very sight of the illustrious
Drona struggling in battle and of many other foremost of warriors, slew
the ruler of the Sindhus. Behold, O son of Radha, many foremost of kings
lying on the earth, slain in battle. Partha unaided by any one, in the
very sight of the illustrious Drona and myself, vigorously exerting
ourselves like a host of inferior animals-slain by a lion. The son of
Sakra hath reduced my host to a small remnant of what it was. How,
indeed, could Phalguna, in spite of the resistance offered by Drona in
battle, accomplish his vow by slaying the ruler of the Sindhus? If Drona
had not himself willed it, O hero, how could the son of Pandu, in battle,
have pierced that impenetrable array, overcoming his struggling
preceptor? Truly, Phalguna is exceedingly dear to the illustrious
preceptor! For this, the latter gave him admittance, without having
fought with him. Behold my misfortune! Having in the first instance
promised protection unto the ruler of the Sindhus, Drona, that scorcher
of foes, gave unto the diadem-decked Arjuna admittance into the array! If
he had in the beginning granted permission to the ruler of the Sindhus
for his return home, without doubt, such an awful carnage would then have
never occurred. Alas! Jayadratha, in hopes of saving his life, had
desired to return home. Having obtained from Drona a promise of
protection in battle, it was I, a fool that I was, who prevented him from
going. Alas, today my brothers having Chitrasena for their head, have all
perished in the very sight of our wretched selves.”[187]

“‘Karna said, “Do not blame the preceptor. That Brahmana is fighting
according to the measure of his power and courage and regardless of his
very life. If Arjuna, of white steeds, having transgressed him,
penetrated into our array, the slightest fault does not, for that, attach
to the preceptor. Phalguna is accomplished in weapons, possessed of great
activity, endued with youth; he is a hero who has mastered all arms; he
is distinguished for the celerity of his movements. Armed with celestial
weapons and mounted on his ape-bannered car, the reins of whose steeds
again were in the hands of Krishna, cased in impenetrable armour, and
taking his celestial bow Gandiva of unfading might, the valiant Arjuna,
scattering keen arrows, and proud of the strength of his arms,
transgressed Drona. There is nothing to wonder at this. The preceptor, on
the other hand is, O king, old and incapable of proceeding quickly. He is
also, O king, incapable of exercising his arms long. It was for this that
Phalguna, of white steeds and having Krishna for his charioteer,
succeeded in transgressing the preceptor. For this reason also, I do not
see any fault in Drona. For all that, when Arjuna, of white steeds,
penetrated into our array, having transgressed the preceptor it seems
that the latter, however skilled in weapons, is incapable of vanquishing
the Pandavas in battle. I think that which is ordained by Fate never
occurs otherwise. And since, O Suyodhana, in spite of ourselves fighting
to the utmost extent of our powers, the ruler of the Sindhus has been
slain in battle, it seems that Fate is all-powerful. With thyself we had
all been exerting to the utmost of our might on the field of battle.
Fate, however, baffling our exertions, did not smile on us. We have
always exerted to injure the Pandavas, relying both on deceit and
prowess. Whatever act, O king, a person afflicted by Fate does, is
frustrated by Fate, however, much the person himself may strive to
achieve it. Whatever, indeed, a man endued with perseverance should do,
ought to be done fearlessly. Success depends on Fate! By deceit the sons
of Pritha were beguiled as also by the administration of poison, O
Bharata! Burnt they were in the palace of lac, vanquished they were at
dice. In accordance with the dictates of statecraft, they were exiled
into the woods. All these, though done by us with care, have been baffled
by Fate. Fight with resolution, O king, setting Fate at nought. Between
thee and them, both striving to the best of your prowess even Fate may
prove auspicious to that party which excels the other.[188] No wise
measures have been adopted by the Pandavas with the aid of superior
intelligence. Nor, O hero, do we see, O perpetuator of Kuru’s race, that
thou hast done anything unwise from want of intelligence! It is Fate that
decides the result of acts, wise or unwise; Fate, ever intent on its own
purposes is awake when all else sleeps. Vast was thy host, and thy
warriors are many. Even thus the battle began. With their small force,
much greater and consisting of men capable of smiting effectually, hath
been much reduced. I fear, it is the work of Fate, that has frustrated
our exertions.”’

“Sanjaya continued, ‘While they were discoursing thus, O king, the
Pandava divisions appeared for battle. Then occurred a fierce battle
between thy warriors and theirs, in which cars and elephants encountered
one another. All this, however, O king, was due to thy evil policy!’”