TITLE: BRAHMA INSTRUCTS THE DEVAS TO GO TO VISHNU

Brahmā said:—O ye highly powerful gods, I have learnt the object of your
arrival here. O leading Suras, your object will be accomplished. That
lord of the universe, who will vanquish Bali the foremost of Dānavas, is
not only the victor of the Daityas but is the conqueror of three worlds
and is worshipful unto the gods. That eternal origin of the universe is
the ordainer of the worlds. People call him omniscient and Hemagarbha.
The great Lord, who will destroy the world and the Asura-chief Bali, is
the origin of all and is our first born. That Yogin, that soul of the
universe is above the reach of thought. Even the Devas do not know that
great one: but that Purusottama knows the gods, ourselves and the whole
universe. By His grace we fare well. And establishing communion with Him
people practise hard austerities in this world.

O Devas, in the northern division and on the northern bank of the ocean
of milk there is a most excellent place called _Amrita_ (nectar): so the
wise say. Go there and being self-controlled practise hard austerities.
There you will hear most sacred, purified words relating to Brahman
grave like the muttering of clouds surcharged with water in the rainy
season. That celestial speech is destructive of all sins and was spoken
by the god of gods of pure soul. So long as your vow will not terminate
you will hear that great universal speech. O gods, you have come to me
and I am ready to grant you boons. Tell me what boon you do want.

Thereupon having bowed unto that one identical with Yoga Kashyapa and
Aditi touched his feet and accepted the following boon. "May Lord
forsooth be born as our son." When they with great reverence said so
Brahmā said "So be it. Let the Devas pray to Him for becoming their
brother and he will agree." Having obtained this boon from him and been
successful in their mission the gods repaired to their respective
habitations. Saying ’so be it’ the Suras, Kashyapa and Aditi touched
Brahmā’s feet and repaired to the nothern quarter. Within a short time
they reached the nothern bank of the ocean of milk as ordered by the
Divine Brahmā. Crossing many oceans, mountains and rivers those leading
celestials saw a highly dreadful quarter enshrouded with darkness and
divested of the sun and creatures. Reaching that place called Amrita the
Suras along with Kashyapa began to practise hard austerities for many
years with a view to propitiate the thousand-eyed, intelligent Yogin
Nārāyana endued with all lordly powers. Observing the vows of celibacy
and silence and controlling their senses and movements the Suras
practised hard austerities there. The divine Kashyapa recited for
pleasing the Lord Narayana many Vedic verses of eulogy (1-26).