TITLE: VYASA’S PRESENCE AT JANAMEJAYA’S SACRIFICE

Sounaka said:—I have thus recited to you the entire Harivamsha with all
its Parvas as recounted by Vyasa’s disciple. May this endless history of
Hari’s family, nectar-like and destructive of all sins, please us. O you
endued with patience, because this history is pleasant to ears it has
greatly gladdened our hearts. Afterwards, O Sauti, what did the king
Janamejaya do on the termination of the _Sarpayajna_ after listening to
this most excellent history (1-3)?

Souti said:—Hear, I will describe to you all what the king Janamejaya
did listening to this most excellent history after the termination of
the _Sarpayajna_. When this sacrifice was finished Parikshit’s son
Janamejaya collected materials for the celebration of a horse-sacrifice.
Then inviting the Ritwikas, priests and preceptors he said:—"I am
desirous of celebrating a horse-sacrifice. Do ye dedicate these horses"
(4-6).

Thereupon informed of the object of Parikshit’s son Janamejaya, of
indefatigable energy, the virtuous-souled Krishna Dwaipāyana, the
foremost of the omniscient, all on sudden came there for witnessing (the
sacrifice). Beholding the great Rishi Veda-Vyasa arrive there the king
Janamejaya offered him Arghya, a seat and water for washing his feet
according to the rules laid down in Sastras. O Shounaka, after they had
both taken their seats the courtiers, from all sides, began to discourse
on diverse Vedic themes. After they had finished their discourses, king
Janamejaya said to the great Muni Veda-Vysa, the grand-father of the
Pandavas and his own great grand-father (7–10):—"The story of the
Mahabharata, having many meanings and abounding in Srutis, is
exceedingly pleasant to ears. It was finished as if in a moment. The
history, which spreads glories and gives fame like unto milk in a
conch-shell, has been beautifully recorded by thee. As a man is not
satisfied with ambrosia and bliss of heaven, so I am not with listening
to the stories of the Mahabharata. Thou art omniscient, O Brahman and
therefore I accost thee whether Rajasuya was not the cause of the
destruction of the Kurus. It appears to me that as many unconquerable
kings meet with death at the time of revolution so the Rajasuya Yajna
was ordained for battle. I have heard that when this Rajasuya was
undertaken by Soma it was followed by the war of which Taraka was the
root. Afterwards when Varuna undertook this great sacrifice it was
followed by the war between gods and Asuras. When the royal saint
Harishchandra undertook this sacrifice it was followed by the battle
Adivaka in which many Kshatriyas were killed. Last of all when the
worshipful Pandavas undertook this most arduous sacrifice it was
followed by the great Bhārata war. O great sir, why did you not all put
a stop to that Rajasuya Yajna the root of the world-destroying war? It
is difficult to celebrate this sacrifice well with all its branches.
When one of the branches of a sacrifice is neglected it leads to the
destruction of people. Thou art the grand-father of our ancestors, their
first lord and art cognizant of the past and future. Thyself living as
their guide why did those intelligent kings, as if having none to govern
them, and deviating from the paths of morality, commit sin?" (11-23).

Vyasa said:—O king, forsooth urged on by Destiny those kings acted
against the established usages and customs. They did not ask me any
thing about the future. And, I too did not tell them any thing unasked.
Besides I was not capable of counteracting the future result, for none
can with stand the work of Destiny. I will describe to you the future
subject about which you have questioned me. But Destiny is now very
powerful. And even listening to my words you will not be able to carry
them out. Either through fear or zeal you will not be able to stand in
the ways of a man for it is impossible to overcome predestination. The
Sruti lays down that the Kshatriyas should celebrate Ashwamedha, the
foremost of sacrifices. On account of the greatness of that sacrifice
Vāsava will violate your Ashwamedha. O king, even if you are capable of
withstanding Vāsava either by your manliness or through the will of the
Providence you should not celebrate such a sacrifice. However you,
Sakra, or the presiding priests will commit no sin thereby for Destiny
is all-powerful. Ordained by Destiny Brahmā will obstruct the
termination of Indra’s sacrifice. In the course of time and according to
the will of the Providence creation will come to an end with the
termination of a cycle and the Brāhmanas will sell the fruits of
sacrifices. Therefore know this universe mobile and immobile, as being
subject to Destiny (24-32).

Janamejaya said:—O reverend sir, tell me, what cause will arrive for
putting a stop to the horse-sacrifice. Hearing it I will desist (33).

Vyasa said:—O king, the cause thereof will be the ireful curse of a
Brāhmana. You may fare well if you try to avoid it. O slayer of enemies,
as long as the world will last, the Kshatriyas will not be able to
collect materials for your horse-sacrifice (34–35).

Janamejaya said:—Aswamedha will be stopped by the power of the fiery
curse of a Brāhmana, but I will be the instrument thereof. Indeed I am
filled with fear and shame. How will a man like myself, the performer of
many good deeds, like unto a bird, tied with a noose, flying into the
sky, engage in such a cursed work, and exert to live? If I engage in
such a work, through me a rite, practised from generation to generation,
will be spoiled. Console me, saying that the horse-sacrifice will again
be undertaken (by kings) (36–38).

Vyasa said:—As an energy, counteracted by another, lives in it, so the
Aswamedha sacrifice, although stopped, will exist in the gods and
Brāhmanas. Leading the life of a soldier, some descendants of Kashyapa
will again revive this horse-sacrifice in the Kali-Yuga. O king, as the
hour of universal dissolution brings into being many evil portends such
as white planets so a Brāhmana, born in his race, will revive this
sacrifice in the cycle of Kali. This sacrifice will bestow proper fruits
on men celebrating it and they will range at the gate of the end of the
cycle encircled by the Rishis. From that time the senses of men will not
renounce the fruits of the pristine good works and will not be attached
to them in this world. A highly subtle religion, deviating from the
duties of the four orders, and having charity at its root only, the
offspring of the time, will flourish. Practising austerities to a small
extent men, O Janamejaya, at the end of this cycle will acquire
spiritual powers. Thus blessed they will practise pious rites (39–45).