TITLE: AN ACCOUNT OF PIRTHU AND THE CHURNING OF THE OCEAN

Janamejaya said:—O Brahman, when egoism and ignorance thus prevailed all
over the world what did the people do (1)?

Vaishampāyana said:—In order to took after the work of adminstration
Prajāpati, along with the Rishis, installed Vena’s son Prithu on the
throne (2). When the Tretā Yuga set in the people spoke amongst
themselves:—"He is our most excellent king born (3). He will grant us
livelihood, protect the Brāhmanas and all creatures in satisfaction of
duties entrusted to him by the Lord" (4).

In the meantime, exhausted with the practice of various religious
regulations the gods were taking rest on the table land of the mount
Gandhamādana (5). Thereupon when the spring set in gods and Dānavas,
smelling fragrance from all sides, were highly pleased. They
thought:—"The fragrance of flowers scattered by the wind is highly
charming and delightful therefore the fragrance of every earthly object
is most excellent." Smelling that fragrance the Daityas were a little
surprised in the beginning. Afterwards being delighted they attained to
most excellent felicity (6–8). Excited with that smell they all said in
a body: "Such is the power of every flower: we do not know what will be
its fruit (9). Various modes of action are to be ascertained by
inference. By the power of this understanding men perform auspicious and
inauspicious deeds (10). With the powerful mount Mandara capable of
assuming forms at will we will grind the herbs in water³²⁵ (11). We will
churn the ocean with great force, drink ambrosia and in a body make
ourselves ready for destroying Avidyā or ignorance (12). The great force
Vishnu, whom we worship, will be our guide (in Yoga); and although
living with Ripus (passions) still we will conquer them and enjoy
Dyuloka and Bhurloka (13). With roots, leaves, branches, flowers and
fruits³²⁶ we will carry ambrosia to earth. (14)". Having spoken thus
about the shaking of the mount Mandara the Daityas extracted all the
herbs grown on the mount Gandhamādana. And then they ran for uprooting
the mount Mandara and agitated the earth. The Dānavas, born in the race
of Danu, could not uproot the mount Mandara. Their knees bruised they
fell down into the hollow of the mountain (15–17).

Thereupon having dissipated their sins through ascetic penances and
controlled their self through proper understanding they bent their heads
down and sought refuge with Ishwara (18). Informed of their mental
desire the omniscient and self-controlled Brahmā, who can go every where
for the well-being of all the worlds, said in an invisible voice
(19-20). "Let the Adityas, Vasus, Rudras, Maruts, gods, Yakshas,
Gandharvas and Kinnaras be united and uproot the mount Mandara and
possess the herbs the very essence of the Himalaya" (21–23). Hearing
those words in the presence of all, the Daityas, endued with the
strength of arms, multiplied themselves into many with mind and words
near the ocean of salt of water where Pushkara was placed by all the
Devas and Dānavas (24-25). Having converted the mount Mandara into the
churning rod and Vāsuki into chord they churned the ocean of salt water
with the herbs for thousands of years. With the mixture of water and
herbs arose ambrosia in the form of milk (26–27). Possessed by avarice
and anger the Asuras pilfered that ambrosia. Thereafter arose
Dhanwantari, wine, Sree, Koustava jewel, the clear moon, the beautiful
horse Ucchaishravā and then milk. In order to take it the Devas said to
Rāhu:—"None, amongst the Daityas and Danāvas, has drunk this ambrosia."

Thereupon with discus Hari cut off Rāhu’s head. Earth himself snatched
away from Indra’s hand that nectar-like _Jnāna_ which even the departed
manes and Munis have not enjoyed perpetually. Urged on by the Vedic
phrases and accepted the discipleship the Earth stole away that nectar
of knowledge (28–31).

³²⁵ The esoteric meaning is:—The mount Mandara means true
 understanding; _Payas_ means _Jnana_ or knowledge and
 _Oshadhis_—bodily attachment. The meaning is that by means of true
 understanding we will drown bodily attachment in true knowledge.

³²⁶ That is, being united with father, wife, brothers, children etc.