TITLE: KSHATRA YUGA DESCRIBED

Janamejaya said:—O Brahman, I have heard of the first Yuga which is
called Brahma because it leads to the attainment of Brahman. O Lord, I
wish to hear now some thing about the Kshatrayuga which abounds in
regulations, brief and explanatory, which is sung by the Rishis
conversant with expedients and which is beautified with sacrifices
(1-2).

Vaishampāyana said:—I will sing the greatness of this Kshātrayuga, which
is adored with diverse charities and sacrifices and beautified with many
creatures (3). In this Kalpa the Lord, who knows himself as the
four-armed Vishnu, seeing differences and incarnating himself as Daksha
begotten by Brahmā, procreated many offspring. On account of his being
shorn of attachments for the senses and the body he flourished amongst
the Brāhmanas as having his soul immersed in communion and endued with
the knowledge of inner self. All these Brāhmanas, who were of the size
of a thumb, were capable of passing through the solar region and ranging
over all other _lokas_ by virtue of the regulations leading to
emancipation and other religious rites. They were always busy with
sacrifices and with controlling the senses and mental faculties. In
order to gain the pleasure of Iswara they engaged themselves in Vedic
rites. They were masters of the three Vedas. They led the life of
celibacy and were enlightened with the knowledge of Brahman. These
Brāhmanas, of good conduct and consummate understanding, met with death
after thousands of years (3–3). The Brāhmanas are pervaded by the
quality of Sattwa, the Kshatriyas by that of Rajas, the Vaishyas by that
of Raja-Tamas and the Sudras by Tamas (9). The colour of Brāhmanas is
white, that of the Kshatriyas is red, that of the Vaishyas is yellow and
that of the Sudras is smoky-dark. Thus they have been divided by the
thoughtful Vishnu (10). O king, thus according to qualities and colour,
men are divided, in this world, into Brāhmanas, Kshatriyas, Vaishyas and
Sudras. Observing highly wonderful and different sorts of duties, men of
the same size, although apprized of the means of the works, are divided
into four Varnas for partaking of the fruits thereof (11-12). The first
three castes are entitled to perform the rites laid down in the Vedas.
Therefore, O king, on account of your faith in Vishnu, you are entitled
to read the Vedas. And therefore the birth of the three Varnas, namely,
the Brāhmanas, the Kshatriyas and the Vaishyas is owing to Lord’s grace.
Encompassed with works affording enlightenment regarding the true form
of Vishnu, the Lord Prāchetas Daksha, through his Yoga power and wisdom,
undertook the work of creation. Thereupon, for the advancement of arts
and serving the three other Varnas the Sudras were produced. They are
not entitled to perform the ceremony of initiation and read the Vedas.
As before fire is produced from a piece of rod by concussion smoke
rises, but it does not serve the practical purpose, so the Sudras,
taking birth in this world, have multiplied themselves, but they, not
being initiated, cannot perform the various Vedic rites (13–17).

Thereupon Daksha begat his other sons who were the supporters of the
Vedas, strong, endued with great energy, power and effulgence. Daksha
said to them:—"O ye powerful sons, from your mouths I wish to know the
strength of your mother, the earth. I am powerful and therefore cannot
find out the end of the earth; you should be like me. Afterwards
ascertaining the truth I will distribute energy and strength amongst
creatures. On account of the vastness of the soil my creatures will
multiply themselves." The goddess, earth, the essence of the great
creative energy of the Lord, did not show herself unto Daksha’s sons who
were desirous of seeing her. When in the Krita age the pure souls, of
the sons of Prajāpati pervaded by the quality of Sattwa, are purified
with seeing the Prakriti, Nature, the mother of all creatures, without
being urged on by Purusha, creates all engendered by sweat and eggs and
decreases and increases all creatures who, by nature, partake of the
fruits of works (18-23).