TITLE: THE DANAVAS DESCRIBED

Vaishampāyana said:—Hear now of the names, forms, accomplishments and
the principal weapons of the Dānavas. Viprachitti, Shivi, Shanku,
Ayashanku, Ayasshirā, Ashwashira, the powerful Hayagrivā, Ketumān, Ugra,
Syogra, Vyavra, the great Asura Pushkara, Pushkala, Swashwa, Ashwapati,
Prahāda, Ashwashirā, Kumbha, Sanglhāda, Gaganaprya, Anuhrāda, Harihara,
Varāha, Sanhara, Aruja, Vrishaparva, Virupaksha, Munindra,
Chandralochana, Nishprabha, Suprahva, Nirudara, Ekavaktra, Mahāvaktra
Dwivaktra, Sherasa, Sharabha, Kunatha, Kupatha, Kvatha, Mahagarbha,
Shankukarna, Mahādhwani, Dirghajish, Arkavadana, Mriduchāpa, Mriduprya,
Vāyu, Garistha, Namachi, Shamvara, Viksharā, Chandrahanta, Krodhahanta,
Krodhavardhanā, Kālaka, Kalakaksha, Vitra, Krodhavimokshana, Garistha,
Havistha, Pralamva, Naraka, Pritha, Indratapana, Vatāpi, Ketumān,
Asilomā, Vitomā, Vāskala, Pramada, Mada, Shrigālavavana, Keshi, Ekāksha,
Rahu, Tuhunda, Samala, Sripa—these and many other Daityas appeared
before the Great Vishnu who was about to place his feet (1-12). Of them,
some took up nooses, some had their mouths wide open, some had the voice
of asses, some took up Satghnis, some discus in their hands, some had
thunder-bolts, some rods, some mortars, some swords, some Pattiças, some
Parashwadhas, some Praças, some clubs, some Parighas, some huge stones
and some Pushalas in their hands. Some Dānavas had trees in their hands,
some had bows, some had clubs, some had Bhushundis, and some shook there
with daggers in their hands. Those dreadful and highly powerful Dānavas,
dressed in various ways, were armed with diverse weapons. Some had their
mouths like those of tortoises, some had like those of fowls, some had
like those of swans, and some had like those of asses; some were
camel-mouthed, some were boar-mouthed and some dreadful Dānavas had
mouths like Makaras. Some had their faces like hares, some like cats,
some like Sukas, some like cows, some like deer, some like Garuda, some
like swords and some like peacocks; some were horse-mouthed, some were
elephant-mouthed and some had faces like those of various other weapons.
They put on skins of elephant and antelope. Their persons were covered
with bark. Some amongst them were adorned with gold. The Asuras put on
crowns and wore Kundalas; they, clad in various raiments, were adorned
with diverse garlands and pastes. Holding their burning weapons those
Dānavas and Asuras approached Hrishikesha who was about to place his
feet. The effulgence of the Lord at that time, who was about to conquer
the three worlds, was like that of the sun. Having smashed all the sons
of Diti with his palms and feet the omnipotent lord possessed the three
worlds with his three foot-steps. Having assumed a huge form he first
attacked the earth; when he occupied the earth the sun and moon were in
his heart. When he occupied the sky they were in his waist and when he
occupied the heaven they were on his knees (13–29). The twice-born thus
described the form of Vishnu of incomparable prowess. Having conquered
the three worlds and slain the leading Asuras, Hari, adored of the
universe, conferred the earth on Indra the king of gods. The powerful
Vishnu assigned to Bali the region under the earth called Sutala.
Obtaining that region for his residence the foremost of Asuras Bali was
pleased. Since then the king of Asuras has been living in Rasātala.
Living there the greatly effulgent Bali engaged in great meditation. The
intelligent Bali said to Nārāyana, adored of the universe "O Lord, do
thou command me particularly what I should do now." Thereupon Vishnu,
the lord of celestials, said to the Daitya king Bali (30–31).

Vishnu said:—"O great Asura, I have been pleased with you; I am ready to
grant you a boon: pray for it. May good betide you. Do you pray for
desired-for objects. Never under any circumstances disobey the words of
Sakra, the king of gods. This is my command to you. If you obey it you
will meet with your well-being. O Daitya, the water, your offered, was
taken by me in the cavity of my palm and therefore you have no fear
anywhere from the gods. Along with all the Daityas and your followers,
do you live by my favour in that part of the nether region which is
called Sutala. Remembering my mandate do not disregard the words of
Shakra of incomparable energy. O great Asura, all the gods are
worshipful unto you. You will attain to all your desirable objects; you
will acquire many dresses both in this world and in the next. And by my
favour you will always reign supreme over the Daityas. You will enjoy
various objects and celebrate sacrifices accompanied with gifts.
Whenever you will transgress this my command the highly powerful
serpents will bind you with their hoods. You should always bow unto
Mahendra and other gods. Indra, the king of gods, is my elder brother;
you should therefore obey his command" (35–44).

Bali said:—"O great God, O holder of conch-shell, discus and club O God
of gods, O preceptor of the gods, and Asuras, O king of gods, O foremost
of celestials, what position will be mine when I will live in that
nether region? How shall I live there? How will my fame be unbroken?"
(45-46).

The Lord said:—"O foremost of Daityas, a Srāddha without a Shrotrya,
study without vows, sacrifice without presents, Homa without Ritwikas,
gifts without reverence and impure Havi, these six portions will belong
to you. The virtue of those who are ill-disposed towards my votaries,
the virtue of persons who are engaged in buying and selling, the virtue
of Agnihotras, the virtue of those who make charities without reverence
and the virtue of those who officiate as priests, will be your share, O
king of Daityas, by my favour (47–48)".

Vaishampāyana said:—Hearing the words of the high souled Vishnu, the
foremost of Asuras, Bali said "So be it." And carrying out the command
of the Deity, he entered into the nether region. In the meantime the
Divine Vishnu, adored by the gods, made divisions of the kingdom. He
conferred the eastern quarter on the king of gods of incomparable
prowess, the southern quarter on the great Yama the king of the departed
manes, the western quarter on the high-souled Varuna, and the northern
quarter on Kuvera, the king of Yakshas; the region under the earth he
gave to the king of Nāgas and the region above he conferred on Soma.
Having thus parcelled out the three worlds the highly powerful lord of
celestials Vishnu, adored of the great saints, repaired to the heavenly
region. After the departure of that irrepressible dwarf all the gods,
with the performer of hundred sacrifices before them, were filled with
joy (49–56).

Vaishampāyana said:—After Krishna had departed having bound Virochana’s
son Bali with seven hooded serpents such as Kampana, Ashwatara etc. the
celestial saint Nārada, of his own accord, came to him who was stricken
with pain in consequence thereof (57–58). Seeing him thus afflicted and
filled with compassion he said to that king of Dānavas:—"I will find out
means for releasing you. O king of Daityas, with a purified soul
meditate on the god of gods Vāsudeva who is without beginning or end and
who is eternal and undecaying; with your mind devoted to him you will in
no time acquire emancipation" (59–61).

Thereupon his soul purified and mind controlled Virochana’s son, with
folded hands, learnt from Nārada the means of attaining to emancipation
(62). Having learnt that celestial hymn sung by Nārada the great Asura
Bali began to recite the names of that Great God by whom the Earth was
raised up (63). Salutation unto the Eternal and Great Lord without end.
Salutation unto the lotus-navelled Deity Vishnu who lay on water.
Assuming a body endued with the energies of seven forms thou dost invade
the three worlds. O lord, thou art the death of Kāla. Do thou release
me. When the sky is divested of the sun and the moon, when sacrifices
and ascetic penances are on the wane, do thou think of creating the
universe again. Do thou release me by this thy power. Mārkandeya, the
foremost of the twice-born, saw in thee Brahmā, Rudra, Indra, Vayu,
fire, rivers, serpents and mountains. Do thou release me. In the
previous Kalpa Mārkandeya Muni entered into thy belly and saw the entire
universe mobile and immobile. Do thou save me by this thy power.
Resorting to thy Yoga power supported by thy learning thou dost alone
create the three worlds and again engage in Yoga. Do thou save me by
this thy power. Lying in water thou dost enjoy Yoga sleep and again
think of the creation. Do thou save me by this thy power. Assuming the
form of a sacrificial boar thou didst formerly upraise the earth. Do
thou save me by that power of thine. Raising up the earth with thy tusks
thou didst ordain three Pindas for the departed manes. Do thou save me
by that power of thine. Afraid of Hiranyaksha the celestials fled away.
Thou didst however save them. Do thou by that power release me. Having
assumed a form with a huge mouth thou didst cut off in battle
Hiranyaksha’s head with thy discus. Do thou by that power save me. With
thy roaring formerly the Daitya Hiranyakshipu was killed with his head
and bones smashed. Do thou, by that power of thine, save me. Formerly
before the very eyes of Brahmā the Vedas were pilfered by the two
Daityas. But thou didst regain them however. Do thou save me by that
power of thine. Assuming the form of Hayashira thou didst slay the two
Dānavas, Madhu and Kaitabha and return the Vedas unto Brahmā. Do thou
save me by that power of thine. The Devas, Dānavas, Gandharvas, Yakshas,
Siddhas and Uragas cannot see thy end. Do thou save me by this power.
Thou didst beget a son by name Apāntaralāmā who explained the Vedas. Do
thou save me by this power. O lord, Agnihotra and other Vedic rites, the
sacrifices in honor of the Pitris and Havi are all thy mysteries. Do
thou save me by that power of thine. The Rishi Dirghatama was born blind
on account of the imprecation of his preceptor. By thy favour he
regained his eye-sight; by that power of thine do thou save me. Thou
didst release thy poor votary elephant possessed by Rahu. Thou art
undecaying, eternal, devoted to Brahman and thy votaries. Thou art the
chastiser of those who wend evil ways. Do thou save me. I bow unto
conch-shell, discus, club, quiver, Shrānga bow and Garuda: may they
release me from my fetters. Thereupon conch shell, discus, club, quiver,
Shrānga and Garuda propitiated the Lord and requested him to release
Bali from his fetters (64–86). Thereupon pleased the Lord ordered the
king of birds Garuda, the destroyer of serpents, saying "Release Bali
from the fetters." Thereupon flapping his wings Garuda, of incomparable
prowess, went to Pātāla where Bali was bound by the serpents. Informed
of the arrival of Garuda, the serpents, releasing the great Asura Bali,
fled away to the city of Bhagovati in fear of Vinata’s son. Garuda, who
used to eat up serpents, said to Bali, who had lost his prosperity and
released from the noose by Krishna’s favour who was meditating with his
head hanging down. Garuda said:—"O you of large arms, O king of Dānavas,
the powerful Vishnu has ordered you, freed from fetters, to live in
Pātāla with your children and friends. O Dānava, do not move away an
inch from this place. If you break this contract your head will be
sundered into a hundred pieces" (87-91).

Hearing the words of that king of birds the Dānava said:—"I am obeying
the orders of that Great One. O king of birds let the Lord make some
arrangements for my livelihood so that I may live here happily" Hearing
the words of Bali Garuda said:—"The Lord has already made arrangements
for your maintenance. You will be entitled to the offerings of those
sacrifices that are celebrated without priests and regulations by
persons unacquainted with the means of penance. The celestials do not
partake of such offerings. Nourished by such sacrificial offerings you
will live here happily" (92–96).

Vaishampāyana said:—Kashyapa’s son Vishnu, the supporter of the three
worlds, sent this message to the large armed king of Dānavas. The man,
who reverentially recites this hymn destructive of all sins, has his
iniquities destroyed. The destroyer of a cow is freed from the sin
consequent thereon and the murderer of a Brāhmana is also freed from his
sins. A man, having no son, gets one. A maiden acquires a husband after
her heart (97-99). A woman is soon freed from her labour pain and gives
birth to a son. Kapila, the founder of Sānkhya school and other Rishis,
desirous of emancipation, repaired, freed from sins, to the insular
continent of Shewta the seat of Moksha, by reciting this hymn. This hymn
grants all heavenly objects. For sooth does a man acquire all desirable
objects, who, rising up early in the morning and purifying himself,
reads it with a controlled mind. This dwarf incarnation of the Lord is
recounted by Vipras well read in the Vedas as a glorious deed of Vishnu.
The man, who reverentially listens on every Parva to the recitation of
this heavenly theme of dwarf incarnation, vanquishes all his enemies,
being a powerful king like the highly powerful Vishnu himself. He
acquires also unsullied fame and immense riches and objects of
enjoyment. As the dwarf is the favourite so he becomes beloved of all.
His sons and grand-sons multiply, enjoy freedom from diseases and are
endowed with all accomplishments. The Lord Janārddana is pleased with
him who reads it: and he obtains all desirable objects. So has Krishna
Dwaipāyana said (98-107).