TITLE: THE ASURAS ARE FILLED WITH SURPRISE AT SEEING THE

MAN-LION FORM.

Vaishampāyana said:—O Bhārata, thereupon when Hiranyakashipu and all the
Danavas saw that mighty-armed one like unto the wheel of time and fire
covered with ashes, the beauty, of that man-lion form covered with
matted wells and effulgent like the moon, filled every where of that
spacious Hall. Seeing that form resembling a conch-shell, a kunda flower
and the moon the Dānavas exclaimed "What a wonderful form!" With their
celestial vision however Hiranyakashipu and Pralhāda could perceive that
the Lord, in the shape of a lion, had come there. Pralhāda said:—"O
large-armed king, the first born amongst the Daityas, we have never seen
a man-lion form, nor have we heard of it. How wonderful is this
celestial form! My mind says that this dreadful form has appeared for
the destruction of the Daityas. The gods, oceans, rivers, Himavān, and
other boundary mountains, the moon with the stars, the Adityas,
Ashwinis, Varuna, Yama, Indra, Maruts, Rishis, Nagas, Yakshas,
Gandharvas, Pishachas and dreadful Rakshasas are all in his body. Brahmā
and the Lord Siva appear on his forehead. The mobile and immobile
creation, all the Daitayas together with ourselves, this assembly hall,
the three worlds, all are visible in him as the moon reflected on a
mirror (1-15)".

CHAPTER XXXIX VISHNU KILLS HIRANYAKASHIPU.

Vaishampāyana said:—Hearing the words of Pralhāda Hiranyakashipu said to
the Daityas:—"Hold this lion assuming a wonderful form. And if you
entertain any doubt kill this forest-ranger." Hearing those words and
delighted the Danavas surrounded that huge-bodied lion and showed him
fear. Thereupon sending up a leonine shout, that man-lion, like unto
Death with his mouth wide open, dispersed the assemblage. Worked up with
anger Hiranyakashipu discharged various weapons at the lion. But the
highly powerful Lord remained unmoved like the mountain Himalaya. And
leaping up into the sky the Man-lion tore Hiranyakashipu into pieces
with his nails and killed him. After the destruction of the Diti’s son
the earth, lunar region, solar region, all the quarters, rivers, oceans
and mountains again came into view. Thereupon pleased all the gods
chanted the glories of the Eternal Purusha with various hymns (1-10).