TITLE: AN ACCOUNT OF KALI-YUGA

Janamejaya said:—I do not know whether the time for Moksha
(emancipation) is distant or near. Therefore I wish to know about the
cycle of Kali which has followed Dwāpara struck with the arrows of
virtue and sin. With deeds easily performed we will acquire virtue.
Stricken with this desire we have been born in this Kali-yuga (1-2).

Shounaka said "O thou conversant with religion the cycle of Kali, a
source of trouble to the creatures and the destruction of virtue, is
about to set in. Do thou therefore describe it with its characteristics
(3)".

Shouti said:—Thus accosted the Divine Vyāsa accurately thought of the
condition of men in the Kali-yuga and began to describe the future cycle
(4).

Vyasa said:—When Kali will set in the kings, incapable of protecting
their subjects, will only guard themselves busily exacting tributes from
them. At the end of this cycle the kings will not act like the
Kshatriyas, the Brāhmanas will carry on their livelihood like the Sudras
and the Sudras will behave like the Brāhmanas. O Janamejaya, at the end
of this cycle the Brāhmanas, well read in Srutis and Vedas, will take up
arrows and Havi will be divorced from sacrifices and all people will
take their meals in the same row. When the last of the cycles Kali will
appear men will be artizans, untruthful, fond of wine and meat and know
the wives of their friends. In the Kali Yuga the thieves will fare like
the kings and the kings will act like thieves and the servants will
enjoy unfixed incomes. In the last cycle wealth will be spoken of
highly, the character of the pious will be despised and the fallen will
not be censured. The widows, divorced from the consciousness of virtue
and sin, the ascetics and men of fifteen years of age will procreate
offspring through promiscuous intercourse. In that last cycle the
villagers will sell food, the Brāhmanas will sell the Vedas, and the
women will sell their persons. In this cycle all will read the Vedas and
celebrate Vajasaneyi sacrifices and the Sudras will (boldly) address all
as "O". The Sudras following the tenets of Buddha will abstain from
taking meat. And with white teeth, keen observation and shaving their
heads and wearing silk raiments they will practise religion (5-15). The
Mlechchas will live in the province of Kurupānchāla and people of that
country will live in that of the former. In the end of the cycle men
will go downwards. The Brāhmanas will sell the fruits of Tapas and
sacrifices and the seasons will be perverted. The beasts, with tusks and
teeth, will be set to ploughs and carts: men will till with the water of
ponds and the clouds will irregularly discharge their contents. The
thieves will steal the wealth of one another and wretched men will be
rich acquiring very little money. In this last cycle men will be
divorced from religious rites, the divisions of the land will abound in
deserts, and the cities will be traversed by many roads. In the Kali
yuga every body will become a merchant and the sons will divide the
ancestral gifts. Impelled by covetuousness and false-hood people will
fight with one another and rob their wealth. In the absence of beauty,
personal grace and ornaments the women will be only adorned with hairs
(16-22). In this last cycle, men, divorced from all objects of
enjoyment, as garlands, sandal, etc., will find pleasure only in their
wives (22–23). When the wicked and non-aryans will multiply, when the
number of males will decrease, and dis-proportionate to it that of women
will increase know this as the real sign of the end of the cycle. Then
every body will be a beggar: and no one will give alms. Without
distinction people will accept gifts from other Varnas (orders), And
afflicted by the king, thieves and fire, people will meet with
extinction. In this last cycle people will not get crops, youthful
persons will be visited by decrepitude and people will be unhappy for
their bad ambition. Blowing high and downwards the wind will shower dust
in the rany season and people will feel doubts about the next world.
Every one will be wicked by nature, will villify the God and be
egoistic: being covetous the Brāhmanas will blame others. Adopting the
ways of the Vaishyas the Kshatriyas will maintain themselves by
cultivation and trade and the Brāhmanas will destroy the dignity of
religion (24-29). In the end of the cycle men will not observe their
vows and promise. And what to speak of their satisfying their own debts,
they will, for it, even cast off courtesy. Fruitless will be a man’s joy
and fruitful will be his anger. For milk the sheep will be regarded. In
the end of the cycle, men, shorn of the knowledge of scriptures, will
naturally behave thus. Disregarding moral laws, men, proud of their own
learning, will interpret the Sastras. When the last cycle will set in
every one, without the instruction of their elders, will acquire
knowledge in all branches and there will be no one who will not be a
poet. Deviating from their right duties the Brāhmanas will turn out
astrologers and the kings will become thieves (30–34). In the end of the
cycle those men, who will co-habit with bastard women, be deceiptful and
drunkards, will be Brahmavadins and celebrate horse sacrifices. Eager
for acquiring riches the Brāhmanas will officiate as priests for
unworthy persons and partake of the forbidden food. Every one will
recite "Bho!" and no one will study the Vedas. The women will put on one
conch bangle and use an ornament of the shape of a paddy. The stars will
not be united with proper planets, the quarters will be contrary—the
appearance of an evening and burning will always be seen. The son will
engage his father in works and the daughter-in-law will order her
mother-in-law. Men will co-habit with beasts and women of different
castes. The disciples will wound their preceptors with wordy shafts and
men, maddened, will speak many things. Without offering the first four
oblations to the gods the Agnihotris will take their meals; and without
offering food to their guests, men will eat themselves. Deceiving their
sleeping husbands the women will visit other men, and men too, leaving
their sleeping wives, will go to other women. When the cycle will run
out people will be visited with diseases, mental agony and envy and they
will not remedy their own actions (35–43).