TITLE: THE LORD COMES OUT AS A BOAR

Vaishampāyana said:—When the gods were assailed and their king became
motionless the holder of discus (Vishnu) made up his mind for the
destruction of Hiranyaksha the holder of club (1). Assuming the form of
a huge boar, described before, the Lord, the slayer of Asuras, came
there (2). He took up his conch-shell shining like the moon and his
discus of a thousand blades resembling the Chakra mountain (3). The
immortals always recite the secret names of this undecaying Purusha,
such as Mahadeva Mahabudhi, Mahayogin and Maheshwara. He is the foremost
of those conversant with the knowledge of _Atman_. He is always served
by the pious. That ancient Purusha, the creator of the universe, is
worshipped in the three worlds. He is the Vaikuntha of the celestials,
Ananta of Bhogis, Vishnu of the Yogins, and the presiding god of the
sacrificial rites. By his grace the celestials partake of the three-fold
sacrificial offerings. Having struck that foremost of Daityas with his
discus the Lord blew his most excellent conch-shell. Hearing that
dreadful blare of the conch-shell which strikes terror unto the Asuras
the Dānavas fled away on all sides.

Thereupon the great Asura Hiranyaksha, having crimson coloured eyes,
said in anger, "Who is he?" and cast his looks on Nārāyana, in the shape
of a boar, the dispeller of the calamities of the celestials, who stood
before him with the discus. Thereupon Hiranyaksha and other Asuras, with
various weapons, encountered Nārāyana. Although assailed by the highly
powerful Daityas with various weapons Hari stood unmoved in the
battle-field. Afterwards the highly powerful Hiranyaksha discharged a
burning Sakti on the breast of the boar-formed Nārāyana which filled
Brahma with surprise. Seeing that Sakti about to fall upon him the
highly powerful Boar, setting up a roar, felled it on the ground.
Thereupon the Lord, whirling his sunny discus, shot it on the head of
the Danava king. Like unto the summit of the mount Meru clapped by a
thunder-bolt the Daitya-king fell down dead on earth; on his death, all
the Daityas filled with fear, fled away on all sides (4–23).