TITLE: THE GOD AFTER DISSOLUTION

Vaishampāyana said:—Thus when every thing will be converted into one
ocean the highly illustrious Lord Hari, having brought about the
dissolution of the universe as the material cause, exists as pure
intelligence. The great Nārāyana, who is above the reach of the quality
of Rajas and whom the learned describe as eternal, covered with his own
consciousness, lies asleep for three ages in the body of the impassable
ocean the fruit of the quality of Rajas and of elements. The Purusha,
having a head, feet etc., is attainable by Yoga and sacrifices, but the
Great Purusha is different from him. This pure intelligence lies in all.
The Lord created from his mouth Brahmā and the Saman reciters, and from
his arms Hotas and Adhyaru priests. He then created Mitra and Varuna,
the reciters of the Vedas, Samprastata and Pratishta. From his belly he
created Pratiharta and Pota. From his two thighs he created Adhyapak and
Neshta, from his hands created Agnidra and Subramanya and from his arms
he created Grāvā and Unneta. Thus the Lord created these most eminent
sixteen sacrificial priests. The Lord is known in the Vedas as the great
Soul. Through sacrifices one can attain to Him. The Vedas, Upanishads
and the sacrifices are described as the means for attaining to Him. When
the Lord exists in the form of his pure intelligence a wonderful affair
takes place. It is heard that Mārkandeya witnessed it (1-12).

By virtue of a boon granted by the Lord and His power the great Rishi
Mārkandeya lived for many thousand years. And when he was worn out he
lived in the cavity of His belly. There he recited names, performed Homa
and practised hard penances. Afterwards issuing out on pilgrimage he
visited all the sacred shrines of the world, hermitages, various
countries and cities. Thus travelling he gradually came out of the
Lord’s mouth; but over-powered by the illusory power of the Deity he
could not think that he had come out (13-16). Thus coming out of His
mouth Mārkandeya saw one ocean, _i.e._, Brahma in pure intelligence and
all covered with the darkness of ignorance. Seeing it, he was possessed
by a dreadful fright and was anxious about his own life. But seeing the
Pure Intelligence he was pleased and filled with great wonder. Unable to
discriminate all particularly and wholesale, he, stricken with terror,
thought—"Is this my thought, stupifaction or dream? All these appear to
me in a different light and nothing seems as real. The Real is shorn of
attachments and the pain of ignorance. It never appears in such a mental
desire. What is this region divested of the moon, the sun, the air,
mountains and earth?" Thus thinking he saw in that great ocean like into
a cloud surcharged with water a mountain-like Purusha lying asleep. That
Purusha was as if afflicting the worlds with his sunny effulgence. He
was awake as if for his gravity and breathing like a serpent (17-23).
Then curiously enquiring "Who must be he?" the great Muni Mārkandeya
approached the Lord and gradually entered into the cavity of his belly.
Entering there and thinking that he had dreamt a dream he, with firm
conviction, began to move about there as before. As formerly Mārkandeya
ranged over the surface of the earth visiting all the shrines so he
travelled there. By his Yoga power he saw in the cavity of the Deity’s
belly a hundred performers of sacrifices accompanied with profuse gifts,
and the Brāhmanas and other castes of good conduct who were observant of
the duties of the four Ashramas and following good ways. Although he
travelled there hundreds and thousands of years the intelligent
Mārkandeya could not arrive at the end of the cavity (24-29).

Thereupon once on a time Mārkandeya again came out of (the Lord’s) mouth
and saw a boy asleep on the branch of a fig-tree. The inside of that
forest, girt with one ocean, was covered with dew and was not therefore
visible: the earth was shorn of the four sorts of creatures and
everything looked dreadful. Seeing it Mārkandeya was again filled with
curiosity, but could not get near that boy who was effulgent like a
thousand suns. Afraid of the Lord’s illusion he stood by the solitary
water and thought "Have I not seen it before?" He then descended into
the calm and limitless ocean and worn out with fear and toil he began to
enjoy rest there (30–34).

Thereupon the Lord Purusottama, who had assumed the form of a swan and
attained to boy-hood by His Yoga power, said in a voice gave like the
muttering of a cloud (35). The Lord said:—"O my son, O foremost of
heroes and ascetics, O Mārkandeya, you are a boy. You are greatly worn
out with toil. Come near me, you have no fear (36)."

Mārkandeya said:—"Who, mentioning my name, has destroyed my age of many
thousand years and my asceticism and is thus afflicting me? While
Brahmā, the lord of the universe, designates me as long-lived, it is not
proper for any amongst the gods to address me thus. By my ascetic power
my head has become immortal. What man, desirous of giving up his ghost,
has mentioned my name and felt the desire of of seeing death?" (37–39)

Vaishampāyana said:—When the great Muni Mārkandeya thus expressed
himself in anger the Lord again addressed him who was filled with rage
(40).

The Lord said:—O my son, I am your father and preceptor Hrishikesha, the
ancient Purusha who granted you a long lease of life. Why do you not
approach me (41)? Formerly your father Hiranyagarbha, practising hard
penances, adored me for having a son. Having created you a great Rishi
of a dreadful head, of unlimited life and effulgent like fire I, out of
my will, conferred you on him. Save my own kinsman no one can see me
when I engage in Yoga and sport in the all-extending ocean (42-44).

Vaishampāyana said:—Thereupon hearing of his name and family the
long-lived and great ascetic Mārkandeya, adored of the world, with a
delighted heart and having his eyes expanded with surprise, placed his
folded hands on his head, saluted the Lord with a hanging head and said
(45-46).

Mārkandeya said:—O sinless one, I want to know truly that thy illusory
power by which thou hast assumed the form of a boy and art lying in the
one ocean. O lord, what is this form? and by what name art thou known in
the world? There is not a single element here. Methinks thou art the
great element (47-48).

The Lord said:—I am Nārāyana, Brahmā and the cause of the birth of all
creatures. I create and destroy all elements. I am Indra, the year
amongst the seasons, the cycle of cycles, the revolution of cycles. I am
the entire host of creatures and gods. I am Shesha amongst the serpents,
and Garuda amongst the birds, I have a thousand heads and a thousand
feet. I am Aditya, the sacrificial Purusha, the sacrifice, the fire that
carries oblations, the ocean and am known as the eternal. I am that
Brāhmana Yati amongst the twice-born who have purified their souls by
practising austerities in the world, who have controlled my intellectual
faculties by practicing it for many births. I have pure wisdom, am the
soul of the universe, and the foremost of Yogins. I am the destroyer of
all elements and the end of the universe. I am Karma and energy and the
propounder of religion for creatures. I have no Karma of my own. I am
the soul of the creatures and eternal. I am Prakriti, Purusha, the Prime
Deity, eternal and undecaying. I am the duty and penance of the
followers of all the orders. I am Hayasira and the presiding Deity of
the ocean of milk. I am honesty, truth, great, one and Prajāpati. I am
known as the Sankya, Yoga, the great station, worthy of being adored
with sacrifices and the lord of learning. I am luminary, air, earth,
sky, water, ocean, stars and the ten quarters. I am the year, Soma,
Indra, the sun, the ocean of milk, the other oceans, the forest fire,
and the Samvartaka fire. I drink the watery Havi. I am ancient, great,
the future and am known as the origin of all. Every thing that you see,
hear and perceive in this world is identical with me. O Mārkandeya, I
had created this universe before. See, I am creating it to-day and will
do so in every cycle. Understanding all this, and being eager to acquire
my virtue and spiritual powers do you range happily in the cavity of my
belly. Along with Brahmā and Rishis the celestials are living on my
body. Know me therefore as manifest and unmanifest, as identical with
Yoga and unconquered. I am the great mystic Mantra of three words Om and
the sacred verse Gāyatri which is known as conferring three objects of
life (49–66).

Vaishampāyana said:—The great Muni Vyasa has described in the Vedas and
Purānas that the Lord, assuming the universal form, made the Rishi
Mārkandeya enter into his belly through his mouth. In order to see
personally the great unmanifest Atman and enjoy supreme bliss that
foremost of Munis, Mārkandeya, entered into the cavity of the belly and
began to enjoy rest there. Assuming various forms and ranging in the
great ocean shorn of the sun and moon the eternal Lord, the Great Atman
gradually creates the world and destroys it at the time of dissolution
(67–69).