TITLE: BRAHMA’S CREATION

Vaishampāyana said:—Seated on that lotus the long-armed Brahmā, the
foremost of those conversant with Brahman, practised hard austerities,
raising his hand up. Burning in his own effulgence that powerful Yogin
Brahmā shone there like the sun of a thousand rays. Afterwards having
divided his own body into two, and assumed the forms of the highly
powerful illustrious preceptor of Yoga and of the intelligent Kapila,
the foremost of Brahmavadins, the propounder of the Sankhya philosophy
the Eternal and undecaying Lord Nārayana approached Brahmā. Having come
near Brahmā of immeasurable energy the great and highly powerful
Yogāchharya, worshipped of the great saints, the foremost of
Brahmavadins, conversant with the knowledge of great essence and engaged
in Kshatriyas-like works and Kapila, the propounder of Sankhya, said to
him:—"O Brahman, thou art the master of all creatures, the soul of the
universe, of firm senses on account of the multiplicity of creatures,
the support of the universe, the preceptor of the world and art
(therefore) worshipful unto all (1–7)." Hearing their words and reciting
the three verses, as heard in the Srutis, relating to the knowledge of
Brahman Brahmā created the three worlds. Residing in Bhurloka, of the
three worlds the Lord Brahmā created his eternal mind-begotten son, As
soon as he was born the mind begotten son stood before Brahmā and said
to him:—"O Lord, how can I help thee? Do thou command me." Brahmā
said:—"O you of great mind, do what this Brāhmana Kapila and the
boon-giving Nārayana tell you" (8-11).

Vaishampāyana said:—After Brahmā had said this his mind-begotten son
again said:—"Who is there superior to my father?" Stricken with this
doubt, he again, with folded hands, said:—"I am ready to serve you,
order me, what I am to do and I will carry it out." The great teachers
of Yoga and Sankhya said:—"Do thou recollect the eighteen forms of the
undecaying Brahmā and the Eternal Great Brahman."

Hearing those words the mind-begotton son went away to the north and
acquired the knowledge of Brahman through _Jnāna_ (12-14.)

Thereupon having created the second Bhuvarloka the high-minded Lord
Brahmā created again his mind-begotten son. According to Brahmā’s order
the mind-begotten son appeared before the grand-fathers, the preceptors
of Yoga and Sānkhya and said:—"Do you command me what I am to do."
Afterwards going again with those two preceptors to the region of
Bhogavati he, waiting by their side, attained to a great region (15–17).

After the departure of that mind-begotten son the Lord Brahmā created
the third Bhurbhuvaloka capable of acquiring emancipation and brought
into being his third mind-begotten son. Afterwards commanded by Brahmā
that mind-begotten son appeared before them and acquainted himself with
their religion and movements. These three persons are said to have been
the sons of the high-souled Shamvu (18–19). Having taken with him these
three sons the Lord Nārāyana and Kapila, the lord of ascetics, went to
his own region (20). After their departure Brahmā, ever observant of
vows, began again to practise hard austerities. Continually carrying on
penances alone and not desisting from them the Lord Brahmā created from
half of his body a beautiful wife. Intercoursing with that wife capable
of creating the world and equal to him in ascetic power, effulgence and
self-control Brahmā, pervaded by the quality of Tamas, created the
patriarchs, the oceans, rivers, the sacred verse Gāyatri, the mother of
the Vedas and the four Vedas. As the instruments of his own work the
grand-father, the creator of the world, created sons, the husbands of
the universe and the creation from whom all the worlds emanated (21–26).

Having first created his two sons, the great ascetics Vishwesha and
Dharma, the support of all the Asramas and giver of boons he next
created the Munis Daksha, Marichi, Atri, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu,
Vasishtha, Gotama, Bhrigu, Angira and others. The descendants of the
above mentioned Rishis created by Brahmā, are known as the great Rishis
of the Atharva Veda. Daksha begat Aditi, Diti, Danu, Kālā, Atāyu,
Sinhikā, Muni, Prādha, Surasā, Krodha, Vinatā and Kadru—these twelve
daughters and twenty-seven stars. Marichi’s son was Kashyapa who became
all powerful through asceticism. Daksha consented to confer those twelve
maidens on Kashyapa. O Janamejaya, the great Rishi Daksha conferred
Rohini and other virtue-bestowing stars on Soma amongst the Vasus
(27-33).

O foremost of the descendants of Bharata, the virtuous Brahmā conferred
on Dharma, the foremost of gods, the five most excellent maidens whom he
had created before namely, Lakshmi, Kirti, Sadhyā, Vishwā always doing
good and Marutvati. In the end, the wife, capable of assuming forms at
will, whom Brahmā created out of his half-body, took upon herself the
form of the cow Surabhi and appeared before him. O Bhārata, for creating
the cows Brahmā, cognizant of the cause of creation and adored of the
world, knew her. By this, he begat eleven huge-bodied sons, crimson-hued
like the evening cloud, consuming all with their dreadful effulgence and
pious. Because they ran crying to the Grand-father as soon as they were
born they passed by the name of Rudras. Nirhiti, Sarpa, Aja, Ekapat
Mrigavyadha, Pināki, Dahana, Iswara, Ahivradhana, the unconquerable
Kapāli and the highly powerful Senāni are known as the eleven Rudras
(34–41).

Surabhi gave birth to bulls, trees which do not grow by cultivation,
beans, sands, lambs, most excellent ambrosia and medicinal herbs. Dharma
begat on Surabhi Lakshmi and Kama and Sadhya on Sadhyā. Prabhava,
Chyavana, Ishāna, Surabhi, Aranya (forest) Maruta, Vashwāvasu, Suvala,
Dhruva, Mahisha, Taneya, Vijnata, Manasa, Matsara and Vibhuti are also
known as the sons of Surabhi. Sadhyā, worshipped of the world of Sādhyās
and following Vāsava begat mountains, serpents and bulls. Dharma begat
on Sushamā in order, Marudeva, Dhruva, Vishwāvasu, the lord Soma,
Parvatta, Yogendra, Vāyu and Nikriti. It is heard that Dharma begat
Vishwadevas on Vishwā. The large-armed Sudharmā, the highly powerful
Shankhapā, Uktha, Vapushmān, Vishwāvasu, Suparva, the highly illustrious
Vishnu, Skumbhu, the Rishi’s son Ruru, highly effulgent like the sun,
are the offspring of Chakshusa Manu. Vishwā gave birth to Vishwadevas.
Dharma begat Maruts on Marutvati namely Agni, Chaksha, Hari, Jyoti,
Sāvitra, Mitra, Amrita, the large-armed Sankshepa, Viraja, Shukra, Vish
wāvasu, Vibhāsasu, Ashmanta, Chirarashmi, Nijudhi, Jayona Adbhuti,
Charitra, Vahupannaga, Vrihanta and Vrihadbhuta the aggrandiser of
others (42-56).

O king, Kashyapa begat on Aditi, the tweve most eminent Adityās living
in the celestial region namely Indra, Vishnu, Bhaga, Tvashthā, Varuna,
Angsha, Aramā, Ravi, Pishā, Mitrā, the boon-giving Manu and Indra.
Aditya begat on Saraswati two superbly beautiful sons namely Rupa and
Vala. Diti and Danu gave birth to the Daityas and Dānavas. The Dānavas
begat on Suravā the reptiles; and they begat on Kāla the Kālakeya Asuras
and Rākshasas. O descendant of Bharata, Anayusha produced all the
diseases and calamities. Sinhikā the mother of planets gave birth to the
Gandharvas, the pious Prādhā to Apsaras, Krodha to all goblins,
Pishāchās, Yakshas and Guhyakas and Surabhi to all quadrupeds. Vinatā
gave birth to Aruna and Garuda and Kadru to all serpents.

O king, when the high-souled Brahmā appeared on the lotus the Viswadevas
thus multiplied themselves. This old account of the origin of lotus I
had heard from Dwaipāyana. When he described it from the beginning to
the end the great Rishis spoke highly of it. The great man, who with
attention always reads this account of the origin of the first lotus, is
divested of grief in this world, and enjoys various pleasures here and
eternal bliss in heaven (57-67).