TITLE: THE DESTRUCTION OF BALI

Janamejaya said:—The Daityas were slain by Vishnu’s power: but what did
they wish for when they grew powerful (1)?

Vaishampāyana said:—The highly powerful Dānavas, on account of their
prowess, prayed for kingdom and the truthful Suras desired to carry on
rigid austerities (2).

Janamejaya said:—Having acquired lordly powers, why did Bali, born in
the race of Hiranyakashipu, celebrate in the days of yore, a
long-extending sacrifice in the land between the Gangā and Yamuna (3)?

Vaishampāyana said:—O great king born in the race of Bharata, the highly
powerful Bali, the foremost of Dānavas, celebrated a Rajasuya sacrifice
with profuse gold in the land situated between Gangā and Yamunā. That
was like a great ascetic penance for him. When that great Asura
undertook the celebration of the Yajna, many Brāhmanas observant of
ascetic vows and well read in the Vedas, accomplished Yatins, Vālikhilya
Munis, and many other twice-born ones, who daily practised many
religious rites, came there in a body. In that sacrifice rich presents
were made. And the preceptor Shukra, like unto fire amongst the
Brāhmanas, came there with his son for officiating as a priest on behalf
of Bali. Like unto Hiranyakashipu amongst the Daityas Bali said to
Saraswati:—"Thou didst tell me that thou wouldst of thy own accord
confer a boon on me. Do thou do it now" (4-10).

In the form of a dwarf Vishnu accepted as alms ground for placing his
three feet from that descendant of Hiranyakashipu (11). Afterwards the
Eternal Vishnu invaded the three worlds with his three foot-steps and
assumed a celestial form. Deprived of their kingdom and with their
soldiers, Prāsas, swords Tomaras, rods, flags, standards, cars, coats of
mail, cases, axes and other weapons, the Daityas entered into the nether
region.

On the other side, filled with joy the gods, along with Vishnu, at once
rose up and installed Indra as their king for establishing their
sovereignty over all the worlds. Bali gratified them with the offering
of ambrosia. Brahmā gave that ambrosia to Mahendra. With this work Bali
was shorn of his sins and became immortal (12-16).

Thereupon first of all the gods blew the conch-shell which sprang from
Brahmā’s hands and the blare of which made the hairs of the enemy stand
erect. Hearing the blare of that conch-shell the three worlds were
controlled and having obtained Indra as their king they enjoyed great
peace. Armed with weapons made of fire and effulgent the three worlds
stood before the mount Mandara (17–19).