TITLE: THE BOAR INCARNATION OF VISHNU

Janamejaya said:—We have heard from the pious sages while reciting the
Puranas about the boar incarnation of Vishnu of incomparable energy, but
we know nothing about his works, accomplishments and object. Is that
Lord identical with sacrifice or Yoga? Is his body made of elements or
illusory? Who is the presiding deity Hari, or Hara? How is his prowess
and conduct? What did he do in the days of yore? Do thou describe truly
before these great Brāhmanas this boar incarnation recorded in Srutis
(1-4).

Vaishampāyana said:—O king, I will describe to you the boar incarnation
of Krishna of highly wonderful deeds, which has been described at length
in religious books by Krishna Dwaipāyana. O Janamejaya, being purified
and self-controlled hear how Nārāyana assumed the form of a boar and how
Hari, the slayer of his enemies, assuming the boar form adorned with the
sacred verses of the Sruti, raised up with his tusks the earth sunk
underneath the ocean. This highly sacred Purana is like unto the Vedas,
and is adorned with Srutis. It should not therefore be recited to an
atheist. He is a spiritual man, who knows the meaning of this complete
Purana and of the Sankhya and Yoga systems expounded in it. After the
running out of the thousand cycles and the termination of Brahmā’s day,
when all sorts of evil omens appear and all the elements become
invisible Vrishākapi, identical with Hari and Hara, takes the form of
Hiranyaretā, as the fire, air and the sun, consumes the world with his
flames and dries up the Vishwadevas, Sadhyas, Rudras, Adityas, the two
Ashwinis, all the Patriarchs, the seven Rishis, Yakshas, Rākshasas,
Gandharvas, Daityas, Pishachas, Nagas, the various classes of Bhutas,
the Brahmanas, Kshatriyas, Vaishyas, Sudras, quadrupeds and other lower
animals living on earth (5-15).

Thereupon in the last part of Brahmā’s day, when according to the desire
of Ishwara, thirty-three celestials, well-read in Itishāsas, Upanishads,
Vedas and other sciences and engaged in pious works and having their
faces discoloured and limbs burnt by his effulgence took Brahmā, the
origin of the universe, before them and appeared there the great Yogin
Nārāyana in the shape of a swan entered into Hari. As in this world the
sun daily rises and sets so the gods appear and disappear in Nārāyana. I
will describe it (16–20). A cycle consisting of a thousand years
complete is called _Nishesha_ for at that time the world, the instrument
of dissolution, does not exist and so all the works of creatures are
brought to a close. Having destroyed all the worlds consisting of the
gods, Asuras and Pannagas, the Lord only, the preceptor of the world,
lives in His own Self. After the end of each cycle the Lord, again and
again, creates all creatures. The Lord is unmanifest and Eternal. The
whole universe exists in Him. When the world is divested of the rays of
the sun and the moon, of smoke, fire, air, sacrifices and religious
rites, when the birds become motionless and no animal moves about, when
the whole world is enveloped with darkness, and every thing becomes
invisible, when all the works come to a close, when the fall of
lightning, earth-quake and other portends disappear, when the enemies
are destroyed and the universe, identical with Nārāyana, arrives at a
state of equilibrium Hrishikesha, the Great soul, strives to sleep.
Wearing matted locks like unto a thousand flames Krishna, clad in a
yellow raiment, resembling a cloud in hue and having red eyes, a breast
pasted with red sandal and adorned with the mystic mark of Srivatsa,
appears there like a cloud charged with lightning. A garland of a
thousand lotuses adorns, his neck and his wife, Lakshmi, herself remains
attached to his person. Thereupon Vishnu, of incomparable prowess and
identical with virtue, the grand-father of all, enters into an
undescribable Yoga sleep. Thereupon after the completion of a thousand
years he himself awakes as the Lord Purusottama the master of all the
celestials. Afterwards the Lord of the world again thinks of creating
the universe. With his supreme power he creates the departed manes,
gods, Asuras and men. He then thinks of the works of the gods. That lord
of speech then creates all the worlds (21-34). The Lord is the creator,
protector and destroyer: he is the ordainer: he is self-control and
regulation (35). All the gods are identical with Nārāyana, all works are
identical with Nārāyana, all truth is identical with Nārāyana and all
dignity is identical with Nārāyana. All Yajnas and Srutis are identical
with Nārāyana. Emancipation is identical with Nārāyana and He is the
refuge of all. Virtue and sacrifices all depend on Nārāyana. Knowledge
and ascetic penances all proceed from Him. There is no god superior to
Nārāyana: nor will there be any (36–38). He is the Self-sprung Deity,
the lord of the universe; He comes within the ken of knowledge as Brahmā
and within that of perception as air. He is identical with _yajna_. He
is known by us as both manifest and unmanifest: he is omniscient and the
creator of all. He displays what the senses cannot: and the latter
cannot perceive what he does not display, The gods, the patriarchs and
the seven Rishis have not been able to know the end of Him. Therefore
the Sruti says that He is without end. His most supreme form the gods
cannot see: they only adore that form of His which He assumes at the
time of His incarnation. The gods only see that form of His in which He
manifests Himself. The form which He does not show no body can search
for. He is the lord of elements, the motion of the vital air and the
fire of digestion. He is the distributor of energy, asceticism and
ambrosia. He enjoys the fruits of _Chāturhotra_ in four Asramas. He is
the ordainer of four Yugas and four oceans. He is the great Yogin.
Having destroyed the universe He keeps it in his womb for a thousand
years and then unfolds the egg. This omniscient Prajapati creates the
gods, Asuras, the Brāhmanas, serpents, Apsaras, herbs, the upholders of
the universe, Yakshas, Guhyakas, and the Rakshasas (39-47).