TITLE: THE MAN-LION INCARNATION OF VISHNU HIRANYAKASHIPU’S

PRAYER TO BRAHMA.

Vaishampāyana said:—O king, I have thus described to you the boar
incarnation of Vishnu. I will next describe the man-lion incarnation in
which form the Lord killed Hiranyakashipu. Formerly in the Krita Yuga
the founder of the Daitya race, the king Hiranyakashipu practised great
penances. Living under water he observed the vow of silence like an
immoveable object for five thousand and five hundred years. Pleased with
his self-control, mastery over his senses and regulations Brahma was
highly pleased. Afterward in his white sunny car drawn by swans the Lord
Brahmā himself came there and said to the king of Daityas "O you of firm
vows, you are my votary. I am pleased with you for your ascetic
penances. May you fare well. Pray for a desirable boon" (1-10).

Thereupon the Dānava-chief Hiranyakashipu, with a delighted heart and
folded hands, said:—"O lord, may none, amongst the gods, Asuras,
Gandharvas, Yakshas, Uragas, Rakshasas, men and Pisāchas, slay me. May
not the Rishis, when angered, curse me. May not my destruction be
brought about with a weapon, mountain, tree, dry or wet articles. May
not my death take place in heaven, nether region, sky or either in day
or in night. May he be my death only who, with the stroke of his own
palm, will be able to kill me with my followers, servants and kinsmen. I
will discharge the functions of the sun, moon, air, fire, water, sky,
stars and ten quarters. I will be Kāma, Krodha, Varuna, Vasava, Yama,
Kuvera and the king of Kimpurushas. May huge weapons appear bodily
before me in a battle" (11-18).

Brahma said:—"O my son, I grant you these wonderful and celestial boons.
These boons are rare and not to be obtained by men. Forsooth, by my
favour, you will obtain all desirable objects."

Vaishampāyana said:—Having said this Brahmā went to the Vairāja region
through the etherial way. Afterwards hearing of the grant of this boon
the gods, Nāgas and Gandharvas went to the Grand-father and said:—"O
lord, by virtue of this boon the Asura will oppress us. Do thou concert
a measure for his destruction." Hearing their words the Lord Brahmā
said:—"O ye gods, he must obtain the fruits of his penances. After he
will have enjoyed them the Lord Vishnu will slay him." Delighted with
what the lotus-sprung Deity had said the celestials repaired to their
respective quarters (19-26).

Vaishampāyana said:—Elated with the power of the boon he had obtained
the Daitya-chief Hiranyakashipu began to oppress the creatures. That
powerful Daitya assailed the ascetic Munis in the hermitages and the
trutuful and self-controlled Brāhmanas. Having vanquished all the gods
in the three worlds he brought them under subjection and lived in
heaven. Urged on by Destiny and elated with the pride of boon he made
the Daityas entitled to sacrifices and deprived the gods therefrom.
Thereupon the Adityas, Sādhyas, Vishwās, Vasus, Rudras, all the saints
and the Brāhmanas approached the highly powerful and eternal Vishnu
adored of the world and sought his shelter. The gods said:—"O Nārāyana,
the gods have sought refuge with thee: do thou save them and slay the
Daitya-chief Hiranyakashipu. Thou art our protector, great preceptor and
the great god. Thou dost please the party of thy friends and destroy the
enemies. Do thou help us for slaying Diti’s progeny." Vishnu said: "Cast
off your fear, O ye immortals, I promise you safety. You will, in no
time, attain to the celestial region as before. I will soon kill that
Dānava king with his people who is elated with the pride of his boon and
is unslayable even by the immortals".

Vaishampāyana said:—Having said this and dismissed the celestials the
omniscient Lord thought of the destruction of Hiranyakashipu. Having
assumed a body, half-lion and half-man, he arrived at Harinyakashipu’s
court. It was highly charming and a hundred _yojanas_ in length and half
as much in breadth. There existed neither decrepitude nor sorrow. It was
adorned with various flowers and excellent seats (27–48).