TITLE: SIVA OBSTRUCTS DAKSHA’S SACRIFICE AND HARI FIGHTS WITH

HIM.

Vaishampāyana said:—O Bhārata, thereupon they all enjoyed peace and a
kingdom of prosperity was established. At that time there existing no
difference as regards the knowledge of spiritual science between gods
and men they all unitedly cultivated the knowledge of _Atman_. Many
however wept on the other hand; the gods accepted the sacrificial
offerings offered by men (1-3),

Thereupon having instructed Prāchetas Daksha for celebrating a
horse-sacrifice the divine Vrihaspati came there encircled by the
Rishis. Daksha was the maternal grandfather of all. Therefore in that
Yajna of Daksha’s who was devoid of the knowledge of Self Rudra,
together with Nandi, set in obstacles for his own share. Rudra’s form,
by his own desire, was divided into two. The greatly pious Nandi was
born as a man. Through his Yoga power the Eternal Brahman, so well sung
in the Vedas, was manifested by Rudra (3–6). Encircled by various Ganas,
such as Sarupa Arupa, Virupaksha, Ghatodara, Urddhanetra, Mahākaya,
Vikata, Vāmana, Shikhi, Jati, Trilochana, Shankukarna, Chiradhāri,
Charmi, those holding nooses, clubs, bells in their hands, those wearing
Kundalas and Katakas and those carrying bugles, flutes and Mirdangas,
Rudra ran on for obstructing Daksha’s sacrifice. The goblins had in
their hands conch-shell, Muraja, Tāla and Tala. Rudra, the holder of
trident and other fierce weapons, worshipful unto the sacrificers, shone
like burning flame in that sacrifice. It appeared that the burning fire
of dissolution was about to devour the universe. As at the end of a
cycle the fire of dissolution devours in no time the whole universe, so
Nandi and the holder of Pināka were about to spoil that most excellent
sacrifice. Striking terror unto Munis wearing bark and skin the
night-rangers ran forward to up-root the sacrificial stakes. The
Pramathas, having coppery eyes, drank up sacrificial offerings with
their tongues. Others, with the end of their tongues long like the
trunks of elephants, began to devour the animals. Others up-rooted the
stakes and struck the beasts. Some threw water into fire and laughed;
some, shining with eyes red like Javā flowers, stole away the Soma
juice. Some, with their hands resembling lotus-stalks, cut off the
Darbha grass. Some broke down the sacrificial posts and others threw
away the jars. Some felled the golden trees set up for beautifying the
ground. Some with arrows broke down the golden vessels. Some destroyed
the vessels and some uprooted Arani. Some broke down the altars, some
ate the balls of rice and some spoiled the various articles with their
nails. Thus continually obstructed day and night that great sacrifice
began to roar like a mighty ocean. On the other hand taking up the bow
made of _Kichaka_ bamboo, that was formerly given to him by the
Self-sprung Brahmā, the highly-powerful Mahādeva set arrows to it. Then
drawing his bow with his knees he struck the great Yajna. Wounded with
arrows that great sacrifice leaped up into the sky: and assuming the
form of a deer and crying aloud he approached Brahmā. Wounded with
arrows the sacrifice found shelter or peace nowhere on earth. Assailed
with arrows piercing to his very vitals he sought refuge with Brahmā
(7–25).

In sweet, auspicious, humble, powerful and grave accents Brahmā said to
the sacrifice in the form of a deer:—"O great deer, you will thus remain
stationed in the sky. You have been defeated with an arrow of bent knots
and variegated colours. Therefore united with Soma do you live with the
eternal Rudra at the head of the planets. Acquiring movements in the sky
be you united with stars; be you Dhruva amongst the luminous bodies. And
this celestial blood, which is gushing out of your wound, and which is
dropping on the sky in consequence of your running, will assume various
colours and will be celebrated as the region of Ketu. During the rainy
season it will form the sign of showers unto creatures. Seeing it people
will meet with happiness or sorrow. On account of its resting on senses
it will in the sky pass by the name of Indra’s bow. O king, men’s eyes
will observe it with surprise. It will be wondrous, variegated and will
be perfectly planned by the mind. In the sky of heart where Brahman is
perceived it will be known only in name. It will not be seen in night.
This wonderful phenomenon will be specially seen in the first part of
the day. Rising up from the earth it will disappear in the sky. At that
time hundreds of Prāchetas Dakshas, in fear of Rudra holding his bow,
will simultaneously run away". With his Pināka burning like Brahma’s rod
at the end of a cycle Nandi stood there along with other Rudras. Holding
up with one hand a huge bow and with another his discus the the
large-armed Vishnu stood there. Holding his conch-shell and club in his
another hand and the sword in his fourth hand Vishnu stood in front of
all desirous of fighting with Rudra (26–37).

Thereupon taking up his Shrānga bow, his conch-shell peerless in the
world and arrows Vishnu, with his soldiers, stood at the head of the
battle. Then putting on his gloves and armour he shone there like an
ocean with the moon. With various celestial weapons the effulgent
Adityas and Vasus stood around Nārāyana. The Maruts and Vishwas took up
Rudra’s cause. The Gandharvas, Kinnaras, Nāgas, Yakshas, Pannagas and
the Rishis, who had laid aside the rod of chastisement, wished well of
both the sides. Wishing for the well-being of all the worlds they
continually recited Lord’s names for the universal peace. Rudra,
standing at the head of the battle, struck Vishnu on his breast and
joints with sharpened arrows. Vishnu, the soul and origin of all, was
not agitated thereby. Although he was endowed with six senses still his
mind was not possessed by anger. Then Vishnu, bending his bow, set
arrows to it. And in no time he discharged that arrow, like unto the
uplifting Brahma weapon, on Rudra’s breast. Even the mount Mandara is
shaken by the thunder-bolt: but wounded with that arrow Mahādeva did not
tremble.

Thereupon leaping up all on a sudden the Eternal Vishnu got hold of
Rudra’s throat and for that the deity obtained the appellation of
blue-throated (38–47).

Vishnu said:—"Thou art without birth and death. Do thou forgive me. Thou
art the precepter of all creatures and scriptures. I know thee" (48).

O descendant of Bharata, the Lord is the agent of all actions and the
most excellent of all elements on account of their being endless. He is
the material and efficient cause of the universe and he has performed
the most auspicious works. Then from the sky were heard highly wonderful
words emanating from the mouths of the Siddhas. Salutation unto thee, O
Eternal Deity (49-51). Thereupon raising up his Pinaka, the powerful
Nandi, begotten by Rudra, almost beside himself with rage, struck Vishnu
on the head. Beholding Nandi the foremost of gods, the omnipresent Lord
Hari stupified him smilingly. Burning in his energy Vishnu, the giver of
the highest object of life, endued with forgiveness, stood there firm
like a mountain. Although powerful like the fire of dissolution still
the unconquerable, incomparable, eternal Hari of a quiescent soul, on
being propitiated, apportioned a portion of sacrificial offerings for
the intelligent Rudra. Vishnu, the foremost of gods, is always virtuous
and shorn of desires and by him the sacrifice was again established. O
king, in that dreadful encounter between Vishnu and Rudra the Ganas did
not leave the parties they respectively espoused. A righteous battle
took place at the time of the spoliation of Daksha’s sacrifice. And at
that time the destruction of sacrifices was introduced in the world. O
king, by the grace of Vishnu, the Prajāpati Daksha, who was not
conversant with the knowledge of self, acquired the knowledge of the
Supreme soul as the fruit of his sacrifice.

This lotus incarnation of the Great Vishnu has been recorded by the
Rishi Dwaipayana in the Poushkara Purana and has been in order improved
by the great Rishis. He, who with attention listens to this Purana,
acquires all objects of desire in this world; and shorn of grief he
enjoys happiness in the next world. The man of great intellect, who
being purified and self-controlled makes the Brāhmanas listen to this
celestial theme, studies all spiritual subjects and is honored in the
region of gods (52–63).