TITLE: THE MOUNTAINS SET ASURAS FIGHTING WITH THE GODS

Vaishampāyana said:—Once on a time influenced by the Lord’s Māyā all the
winged mountains, the upholders of the Earth, left it. Thereupon coming
to the eastern quarter they dropped into the abode of the Asuras
governed by Hiranyaksha as the elephants are drowned into a lake. They
then asked the Asuras about the sovereignty over the celestial region.
(They said) "Although born after you the gods have acquired the
sovereignty: you are not kings although you are born first." Hearing
those words the Asuras made most excellent preparations (1–3). And
setting their mind upon possessing the earth they took recourse to their
incomparable wily understanding. The Asuras, of dreadful prowess, took
up various weapons, such as, discus, thunder-bolt, sword, Bhushundi,
bow, noose, Prāsa, Sakti, Mushala and club. Some, accoutered in coats of
mail, rode upon infuriated elephants. Some great car-warriors drove
chariots drawn by horses. Some rode on horses, some, depending on the
strength of their own arma, rode on camels, some on bulls, some on
buffaloes, some on asses and others proceeded on foot. The soldiers,
desirous of fighting, issued out delightedly encircling Hiranyakasha
(4–8).

Thereupon, hearing of the preparations made by the Daityas for battle
the celestials, headed by Purandara, made also most excellent
arrangements. Encircled by their four-fold army they were accoutered in
coats of mail and finger-protectors and took up quivers and bows.
Stationed in the midst of the army, the celestials, holding fierce
weapons, followed Purandara who was seated on the Airāvata. Thereupon
excited with blare of bugles and sound of trumpets Hiranyaksha
encountered the king of gods. He covered Vāsava with sharpened axes,
Nishtringshas, clubs, Tomaras, Saktis, Mushalas and Pattiças. Thereupon
there took place a highly dreadful shower of arrows. With sharpened
axes, iron swords, clubs, Kshepanis, stones, Satagnis and other weapons
the remaining Daityas struck Vāsava and other gods. Beholding
Hiramyaksha, having smoky hairs, yellow bears, holding various weapons,
having the colour of dark evening clouds, wearing a most excellent
crown, dark-blue and yellow raiments, having arms extending up to knees
and adorned with Vaidurya made ornaments, stand before the Asura army
like unto dreadful Death at the time of the universal dissolution,
Vāsava and all the celestials were greatly pained (9-21).

Beholding Hiranyaksha proceed like the moveable mountain Mahendra the
gods, who took up bows and arrows, stood in the battle-field with
Purandara before them, filled with anxiety. That Daitya army, lighted up
with the lustre of golden armours, stood there like the autumnal sky set
with stars. They felled one another; some, desisting from duel fight,
broke their own arms. Some had their limbs shattered with clubs and some
had their breasts wounded with arrows. Some fell down and some were
thrown down whirling. Some broke down cars and some were crushed down by
them. And some cars could not move on in the thick of the fight. That
battle, like unto an unfair day, covered with Dānava-like huge clouds
and lightings, in the shape of celestial weapons, shone there with the
downpour of arrows caused by both the armies. Worked up with anger the
highly effulgent and powerful son of Diti, Hiranyaksha increased himself
like unto an ocean on the occasion of a _Parva_. From Hiranyaksha’s
mouth, who was worked up with anger, came out burning cinders. With the
air filled with fire and smoke the gods were scorched. Like unto an
elevated mountain the whole sky was covered with weapons, bows and
Parighas. Assailed with Hiranyaksha in battle with various weapons and
having their breast and heads wounded with winged arrows the gods could
not move in the battle-field. The gods, routed by Hiranyaksha in battle,
albeit careful, lost their consciousness. All the gods were thus
terrorized by Hiranyaksha. Assailed with weapons by Hiranyaksha the
thousand-eyed Shakra, who was seated on the elephant, could not move on
in the battle-field for fear. Having vanquished all the celestials and
overpowered their king the Dānava thought the universe as subjected by
himself (22-24).