TITLE: THE BEGINNING OF FIGHT BETWEEN DEVAS AND DAITYAS

Vaishampāyana said:—The Rishis and Gandharvas, headed by Nārada, who
were well-read in the Vedas and who were not visited by sins consequent
upon the omission of rites, worshipped the Brāhmanas with placing the
sun and moon before them. And they always worshipped the Grandfather
(Brahmā) in sacrifices as a son adores his father. Eulogised with sweet
words by those Brāhmanas who had controlled their five senses, who
always did good by all creatures and wished them well the Lord Brahmā
said:—"By good luck (you have undertaken those sacrifices)" (1–4).

Thereupon the omnipotent Lord addressed Kashyapa saying:—"You will, with
your sons, celebrate sacrifices on earth. The Yakshas and the Asuras
will all celebrate sacrifices with profuse gifts." Thereupon desirous of
vanquishishing one another the Daityas, elated with the pride of their
strength, and the Devas began to quarrel, saying "We will first
celebrate sacrifices, we will adore," and were about to fight with one
another. The Rishis, whose sins had been washed away by ascetic penances
and the Brāhmanas who had read the Vedas and their auxiliaries,
prevented them all. Although prevented like unto bulls in Gokula they
began to fight with one another. Leaving aside sacrifices they began to
fight in right earnest. And when the battle set in they felt a desire
for conquering their vital breath and met with death in the presence of
all creatures. Thereupon controlling their external senses through
understanding and non-attachment engendered by true Jnāna the Asuras and
Suras, like unto birds with wings, controlled their own minds.

Thereupon as a boat sinks down under the pressure of the weight of men
so the earth, the ground of sacrifices, was agitated with the flames of
worldly objects. Like unto roaring bulls the Yoga postures are broken
and the tubes are agitated by the vital breaths. Afterwards Madhu, whose
intellectual faculties were agitated and Vishnu, identical with the
quality of Sattwa, fought a dreadful battle which almost overturned the
cycle and struck terror unto all creatures. Thereupon as the cloud
pacifies the forest set on fire so Vishnu controls all the mental
energies. He, who recites the name of the Lord, appears in Sattwa-guna
after controlling his mind (1-16).