TITLE: THE FRUITS OF THE RECITATION OF THE BHARATA

Janamejaya said:—O Revered Sir, according to what rules the learned hear
the Bhārata? What are the fruits thereof. What gods should be worshipped
when it is complete? What charities should be made after every _Parva_?
What sort of a reciter is desirable? Describe all this to me (1-2).

Vaishampāyana said:—O king, hear how the Bhārata should be listened to
and what are the fruits thereof. Hear, O king, I will answer your
questions (3). The gods, living in the celestial region, came down on
earth for sporting. Having finished that work they returned to their own
region. Hear with attention, I will describe the origin of gods and
Rishis on earth. O foremost of Bharatas, Rudras, Saddhyas, Vishwadevas,
Adityas, the two Ashwinas, the regents of the quarters, the great
saints, Guhyakas, Gandharvas, Nāgas, Vidydharas, Sraddhya, Dharma,
Brahmā, the ascetic Katyāyana, the mountains, oceans, rivers, Apsaras,
the planets, years, the two courses of the sun, seasons, the mobile and
immobile objects, the gods and Asuras are all seen simultaneously
described in (this history of) Bhārata. By listening to their names and
illustrious deeds a man is immediately freed from even dreadful sins. If
one duly and in order listens to this history, if one, controlling his
senses and purifying his soul, masters this Bhārata, he should then make
charities to commemorate the occasion. With reverence and according to
his might he should make presents unto the Brahmans of various jewels,
cows with bi-metallic vessels for milching them, well adorned and
accomplished maidens, various conveyances and houses, lands, dresses,
gold, horses, beds carried by infuriated elephants, vehicles, and well
furnished cars. He should give away unto the twice-born whatever
excellent and costly articles he has got in his house. What more he
should even give away his own self, his wife and sons. If one makes
these gifts reverentially he can master the Bhārata. Hear how a man,
according to his might, acquires spiritual powers by being pleased, of
good spirits, bent upon serving, truthful, simple, self-controlled, and
reverential. The one who will recite this Bhārata, must be endued with a
pure character and conduct, clad in a white raiment, self-controlled,
initiated, well versed in all scriptures, respectful and divested of
malice. He must be truthful, worthy of respect and discreet (4-20). He
should read it with ease, without delay or haste, distinctly and with
motion. While reading he should distinctly pronounce words and letters.
He should read it with concentration and in good health and spirits. The
rule is that having saluted Nārāyana, the foremost of Beings Nara as
also the goddess of learning Saraswati one should recite the Bhārata
(22–23).

O great king of Bharata’s race, if one observing regulations and
purifying himself hears the Bhārata from such a person he reaps the
fruits (thereof). After hearing it from the very beginning to the end of
Harivamsha one should satisfy the Brāhmanas by giving them all they
want. The man who once hears it recited, obtains the fruits of Agnistoma
sacrifice, and acquires a vehicle filled with nymphs in the celestial
region. With great pleasure he repairs to Dyuloka with the celestials.
If he hears it twice he obtains the fruits of the Atirātra sacrifice,
drives celestial cars filled with all jewels, wears celestial garlands
and raiments, enjoys heavenly scents and always lives in the land of
gods armed with a heavenly coat of mail. If he hears it thrice he
obtains the fruits of Dwādashāha sacrifice. And he lives like a god for
a million of years in heaven. If he hears it four times he obtains the
fruits of Vājapeya sacrifice. If he hears it five times he obtains the
double fruits and repairs to heaven. Seated with celestials on a car
effulgent like the sun and burning fire, he enjoys for a million of
years in Indra’s palace in the celestial region. By hearing it six times
he enjoys fruits four times as much and by hearing it seven times he
enjoys them three times as much. And riding on a car coursing at will,
huge like the summit of mount Kailasha, consisting of seats made of
emerald, diamond and sapphire, he ranges every where along with the
Apsaras like the second sun. If one hears it eight times he obtains the
fruits of a Rājasuya sacrifice, drives in a charming car drawn by horses
like unto the rays of the moon and fleet like the mind and sees the
faces, more charming than the moon itself, of beautiful damsels. And
lying asleep on the lap of celestial damsels he hears the tinkling sound
of waist-chains and other ornaments. If one hears it for nine times he
obtains the fruits of the king of sacrifices, Vājimedha. Seated on a car
filled with Gandharvas and Apsaras and windows made of gold, and adorned
with golden pillars and diamond seats, wearing celestial garlands and
raiments and pasted with sandal he enjoys in the company of gods in the
celestial region. By hearing it ten times and saluting the twice-born
one drives in a car filled with Gandharvas, expert in singing and
Apsaras, with the sound of a net-work of small bells, adorned with flags
and pennons, jewelled seats, diamond gates and surrounded with golden
nets. Wearing a sunny, crown adorned with golden ornaments, celestial
garlands and unguents he roams at large in the celestial region. He
possesses great prosperity by the favour of gods. In this wise he lives
for many years in the celestial region. He thus enjoys for twenty-one
thousand years the company of the Gandharvas and the king of gods in his
region encircled by celestial damsels; he lives like an immortal in
various lokas.

Thereupon living gradually in the lunar region, solar region, and that
of Shiva he attains to Vishnu’s region. O great king, such is the case;
one should not discuss about it. My preceptor has said that, one should
cherish reverence. Whatever one wishes for in his mind he should give it
to the reciter. He should make presents of elephants, horses, cars,
conveyances, beasts of burden, golden Kundalas, golden thread, various
raiments and scents. He should be like a god and then he will attain to
Vishnu’s region. O king, afterwards at the time of the recitation of the
Bhārata one should make presents unto Brahmans at every Parva. I will
describe them. O king, O foremost of Bharata’s descendants, informed of
birth, country, wealth, greatness and virtuous conduct of a Brāhmana a
Kshatrya should first make him recite benedictory verses and then begin
the work. Afterwards at the termination of the Parva he should please
the twice-born with presents proportionate to his might. He should first
duly give unto the reciter raiments and scents and then entertain him
with sweet pudding. At the time of the recitation of the Astika Parva he
should first entertain the Brāhmanas with sweet meats and then make him
presents. While the Sabhā Parva is recited he should entertain the
Brāhmanas with vegetable dishes. Whilst the Aranya Parva is recited he
should entertain them with fruits and roots. Whilst the Aranya Parva is
recited he should present the Brāhmanas with jars full of water and
entertain them with sweet and delicious fruits and roots grown in the
forest and wholesome dishes. Whilst the Virat Parva is recited he should
make presents of various raiments. O foremost of Bharatas, at the time
of the recitation of the Udyoga Parva he should entertain the Brahmans,
adorned with garlands and unguents, with various wholesome and sweet
dishes. O king, at the time of the recitation of the Bhishma Parva he
should present the Brāhmanas with most excellent conveyances and
entertain them with well cooked dishes endued with many virtues. Whilst
the Drona Parva is recited he should feed the Brāhmanas to their fill
and present them with bows, arrows and swords. Whilst the Karna Parva is
recited he should, with a controlled mind, entertain the Brāhmanas with
various well cooked dishes (24-64). Whilst the Shalya Parva is recited
one should offer wine, molasses and various sweet dishes. Whilst the
Gada Parva is recited one should offer food of barley and whilst Stri
Parva is read out one should please the Brāhmanas with presents of
jewels. Whilst Aishi Parva is recited one should offer first Ghee and
then well-cooked dishes. Whilst the Shānti Parva is recited one should
entertain the Brahmanas with vegetable dishes and whilst the Ashramavāsi
Parva is recited one should entertain the Brahmans with vegetable dishes
and whilst the Aswamedha Parva is recited one should entertain the
Brahman as with dishes after their own hearts. Whilst the Moushala Parva
is recited one should make presents of garlands and unguents (65–69).
whilst the Mahāprasthāna Parva is recited one should make presents of
the articles mentioned before. And after the recitation of Harivamsha is
over one should feed thousand Brāhmanas and present each of them with a
cow and a golden coin. H a poor man cannot afford to do it he should do
half as much. After the termination of each Parva a wise man should
present to the reciter a book and a gold coin. After the termination of
the Harivansha Parva he should entertain the Brāhmanas with milk and
rice (65–73).

At the end of every Parva a person, well read in Shastras and honored by
the good, clad in a white rainment and adorned with nice ornaments,
should, being self-controlled, finish Sanihitas. And then covering them
with a silken cloth he should place them in a holy place and adore them
with garlands and scents. He then distribute meat, various articles,
drinks, gold, cows and raiments. A self-controlled man should always
distribute three tolas of gold. An incapable man should give half or one
fourth of it. He should offer to the Bramhanas various articles after
his own heart. With reverence he should propitiate the reciter like unto
his own preceptor. He should then recite the names of all the gods
especially that of Nara-Nārāyana. Thereupon having adorned the Bramhanas
with garlands and scents he should gratify them with various gifts. By
doing so a man obtains the fruit of the Atirātra sacrifice at every
Parva (74–84).

O foremost of Bharatas, a reciter, who can distinctly read letters and
words and has a sweet voice, should recite the future section of the
Bhārata before the twice-born. He should first feast the reciter well
adorned and then the twice-born ones. He should then adore the former.
If a reciter is pleased one enjoys eternal and most excellent bliss. If
the Brāhmanas are pleased all the gods are propitiated (85–87). O
foremost of Bharatas, so the pious should duly and in order gratify the
twice-born with gifts, after their own hearts (88). O foremost of men, I
have thus described to you the rules. I have answered all your
questions, therefore you should be respectful in this matter. O great
king, he who wishes to acquire most excellent bliss, should assiduously
listen to the recitation of the Bhārata and fulfill conditions at its
completion. One should daily listen to Bhārata and recite it. He, who
has Bhārata in his house, acquires victory. The Bhārata is highly
sacred; various episodes have been described in the Bhārata. The gods
even read it. Bhārata is the most excellent refuge (86–92). The Bhārata
is superior to all Shāstras, Through Bhārata one can acquire Moksha
(emancipation). This is what I tell you. If a man recites the great
Bhārata, the names of the earth, cow, Saraswati, Brāhmana and Keshava he
does not meet with ruin. O foremost of Bhāratas, in the beginning,
middle and end of the Vedas, Rāmāyana and Mahābhārata Hari has been
described. Man, wishing to acquire the great station, should listen to
the recitation of the glorious deeds of Vishnu and Srutis. This great
work is the cannon of religion and is endued with all virtues. He who
wishes to acquire lordly powers should hear it. Dwaipayana has said that
one, listening to Harivamsha in this unreal world, acquires all
wished-for objects. Having finished a complete recitation of Harivamsha
one acquires the fruit yielded by thousands of Aswamedha and hundreds of
Vajapeya sacrifices. O Vishnu, thou art without birth and decay, thou
art the only One worthy of being meditated upon. Thou art gross and
subtle and art beyond the reach of perception. Thou art Saguna and
Nirguna. Only the Yogins can comprehend thee through their knowledge.
Thou art the preceptor of the three worlds and creator. I seek refuge
with thee. May all tide over calamities, may all meet with well-being,
and may all acquire their wished-for objects for the completion of the
recitation of the Bhārata (93-101).