TITLE: THE CREATION OF GANDHARVAS ETC

Vaishampāyana said:—Thereupon assuming the form of pure intelligence the
Grand-father conceives the aggregate creation through his mental
faculties; and through his inner soul withdrawn from all external
objects he performs actions leading to the attainment of Brahman.
Engaged in mental concentration and on account of his unification with
Brahman, he created offspring in his mind. Through his eyes, the
omnipotent Brahmā created the beautiful Apsaras and from the tip of his
nose he created Tumvuru and hundreds and thousands of other Gandharvas
clad in variegated raiments and expert in reciting the Vedas, singing,
dancing, and playing on musical instruments. Through his Yoga power the
omnipotent self-sprung deity created in his mind the immaculate goddess
Veda-Vani, the very incarnation of his own beauty. She had beautiful
eyes, hairs, eye-brows and a lovely countenance. The goddess of sweet
words sat on a charming lotus of a hundred petals. O king, having
created from his eyes the beautiful Apsaras, and from the tip of his
nose the sweet-voiced Gāndharvas, expert in playing on musical
instruments Brahmā, the soul of elements, propounded the art of singing
and produced the Sāman for other Brahmans (1-9). From his two feet were
produced the mobile and immobile creation and men, Kinnaras, Yakshas,
Rakshasas, Pichachas, Uragas, elephants, lions, tigers, thousands of
other animals, grass and quadrupeds. He created from his hands those who
take their food with their hands together with their works. Through
vital airs the creator, seeking happiness for all creatures, created
various functions of breath. And then fixing his mind on the great Atman
full of felicity on account of the obstruction of five senses he
remained there. From his heart he created the kine and through his arms
he created the birds; and then he created acquatic animals in their
different forms (10-14). From the space between the two eye-brows the
lord of Yoga, the divine Grand-father through his Yoga power, created
the celestial saint Angira, burning in effulgence, and endued with true
knowledge for the suppression of six senses. And from his forehead he
created the highly pious, celestial saint Bhrigu. From his head the
great Yogin, Brahmā created the quarrelsome Nārada and Sanat Kumar
(5-17).

When the Grand-father appointed, the eternal king of the twice-born, the
night-ranging Soma as the heir apparent the moon, endued with the power
begotton by great penances, along with the stars, filled the sky with
various creatures and began to range there. Having acquired spiritual
powers through Yoga and mental culture the divine Brahmā created the
mobile and immobile creatures from his body. Brahmā created various
regions as that of the sun &c, and appointed various agents for carrying
on the work of day and night. What has been said before leads to the
attainment of Brahma. Therefore the Brahma Yoga and Sankhya Yoga
constitute the proved science of the scientists. This has been also
proved by the Chārvakas. This leads to unification and diversification.
This creates birth and death. This creates and destroys time. This is to
be known as the discriminative knowledge (18-23).