TITLE: THE CREATION OF RIVERS

Vaishampāyana said:—The mount Mainaka was fixed in that hole which was
created on the face of the earth by the increasing sun (1). It was
called Parvata because it filled up the ocean of desire and Achala
because it was fixed: by nature, it was however called Meru (2). On the
spacious summit of the mount Sumeru lives that highly prosperous
Purusha, begotten by effulgence, and manifest with head, feet, etc. He
was created by the Great Soul through Nature (3). The Brahma energy,
that is laid inside the head, assumed the lustrous burning form of
Purusha (4). From his mouth emanated as if burning in his effulgence
Brahmā with four mouths and with four foremost of the twice-born, the
foremost of those conversant with the knowledge of Brahman. From him the
great elements again came into being (5–6). The earth was upraised from
water by Brahmā who was stationed in his room (on Meru), therefore
though invisible he came within the vision of men (7). Brahmā’s region,
the summit of Meru, is situated at the junction of heaven and earth. It
is a hundred or a thousand Yojanas in height and its extent is four
times as much. No man, with his celestial wisdom, can within many
thousand years, measure its height, for the dimension of the Meru is
only imaginary and cannot be gauged like the extent of a desert or the
depth of a lake. Like its height and extent its circumference is also
limitless. O king, the extent of the mount Sumeru bounded with four side
hills is a hundred Yojanas (8–10). And some anchorites, of accomplished
asceticism, conversant with the knowledge of Brahman, attribute
innumerable other virtues to this mount (11). With Maruts, gods, Rudras,
Vasus, Adityas and Vishwadevas he protects the Regents of the earth
(12). O king, with the Divine Vishnu he protects the earth emanating
from the sun (fire) and Varuna (water) in his Brāhmana body obtained
from Brahmā, Vishnu’s energy is equal everywhere (13-14). With various
observances the truthful Brāhmanas, proficient in the study of the
Vedas, have sung the Brahman (15). All the three worlds exist in Brahman
and Brahman pervades all either as being manifest or unmanifest (16).
The Brāhmanas, who have mastered the Vedas consider those actions as
conducive to our well-being—the daily obligatory rites sanctioned by the
Vedas, breathed out by Isvara and practised by those Brāhmanas who are
not deceiptful even in words, not to speak of works, through the
purification of their mind. Although these rites yeild fruits of good
works still they constitute but an iota of Braman. So the Srutis hold.
The truthful Brāhmanas declare that this universe is but a minutest part
of Brahman who is the soul of all. On account of the diversity of their
mental faculties the Brahmanas worship one Brahman in sacrifices under
various names such as Brahmā, Indra, Mitra, Varuna etc. The Vipras name
in various way the one great Brahman. The form of the universe is gross
and that of the mind is subtle. And thinking that these two forms belong
to understanding only the Lord first created the union of male and
female (17–20). Having made arrangements for diverse enjoyments the
Divine Lord Brahmā enjoys them along with the goddess and his followers
(21). Brahmā is the foremost of Brahmavādins, who, although they are
desirous of following humble pursuits, always wend the way leading to
emancipation (22). (Umā is spiritual science and Parameswara is the
eternal _Jnāna_ understanding) his body is the stream of water flowing
from heaven. Soma is born from this stream; and by it Maheshwara is the
lord of goblins (23). It is called nadi river because having installed
naturally Maheswara as the king of ghosts it made a great noise (24).
Supporting herself on the region of Brahmā and passing through the
mountains that stood in her way she descended on earth by seven ways:
and for this she is called Gangā (25).

O king, in the form of Godavari Ganga divided herself into seven before
she joined the ocean and coursed on various sacred shrines having
divided herself into a thousand parts in the shape of Jānhavi (26).
First gross elements are produced from the great elements and then the
actions of the intelligent begin (27). From his four lotus mouths the
Veda was produced which since then became the fountain of spiritual
instructions to mankind. The sacred sacrifice was an emanation of his
Jnāna, understanding, and the four priests were its four legs—and the
grand-father Brahmā was the lord (28-29). The four legs of Dharma by
which the world is upheld are (the four Asramas), first Brahmacharya—the
condition of a student, and secondly the most sacred condition of a
house-holder (30). The third stage is that of a religious recluse in a
forest, and the fourth is that of union with the great Brahman. These
four stages of a religious life are regarded as leading to the
attainment of heaven (31). The mental faculties of a man develop through
the practice of Yoga and the true understanding of the Vedanta. And the
eternal Vedas exist for the practice of Brahmacharya (32). The Pitris
are gratified with observing the conduct of the house-holders and the
Rishis, stationed on the summit of the mount Sumeru, are gratified with
Yoga (33).