TITLE: THE FRUITS OF YOGA

Janamejaya said:—O foremost of the twice-born, I wish to learn that of
the Treta yuga which I may know correctly the eternal Brahman who is the
subject of all sorts of learning (1).

Vaishampāyana said:—Being dispirited the foremost of Purushas Daksha,
through his Yoga power, assumed the form of a woman on the summit of the
mount Meru. He became a highly charming damsel with well-formed thighs,
breast, eye-brows, a lotus-like countenance and dark eyes. With his half
body Prāchetas Daksha begat on that damsel maidens by the name of
Padmas. Thereupon on renouncing the female form through his male form
Daksha again assumed the form of a most handsome man. According to the
rites of Brāhma marriage sanctioned by the Smritis Prāchetas gave away
those maidens. Of them he conferred ten on Dharma, thirteen on Kashyapa
and twenty seven maidens on Soma. O king, after giving away those
daughters in marriage Dahsha repaired to the sacred shrine of Prayāga
where Brahmā lived. And there concentrating his mental and intellectual
faculties and practising penances with the deer he travelled over the
world. Sustaining himself with grass, roots and fruits he continually
practised rigid austerities. The deer found delight in seeing his
harmless spirit and the Brāhmanas, who had been initiated, who used to
perform religious works and whose sins had been dissipated through
ascetic observances, were delighted with seeing the fruits of his
austerities (2-10).

At the time of conflict between Yoga and intellectual faculties, the
man, who is incapable of standing physical sufferings, who has
controlled his mind and who knows the time, sees the Karma and the
spiritual power acquired through _Yajna_ on account of his omniscience.
And living with their wives in the company of the deer the anchorites,
living on vegetable food and shorn of anxiety, attain to decrepitude.
The Brāhmanas, who have studied the Vedas, see the great Brahman in the
human body and therefore they call it _Brahmakshetra_ or the soil of
Brahma (11-13). The _yatis_, divorced from works, who have controlled
their anger and passions and who range on earth desirous of wending the
eternal way, say this. At the time of Samādhi or mental concentration
the entire creation is immersed in Brahman. And they again appear in the
world on account of their pristine works. Although all creatures are
immersed in Brahman at the time of Samādhi they again appear on earth on
account of their pristine actions. Although unmanifest at the time of
Samādhi, all creatures become manifest through the tendencies of nature.
It is therefore difficult to overcome her. On account of the
characteristics of the time the creatures become manifest and unmanifest
(14-16).

Every object of creation, mobile or immobile, gross or subtle, can
acquire Yoga under the influence of time. While this Yoga is possible
for inanimate objects even every man should strive to acquire the
knowledge of union with God. In the course of time the eternal Kashyapa
begat all created beings on Daksha’s daughters. O king, the Adityas, the
Vasus, the Rudras, Viswadevas, Maruts, the many-headed serpents,
Sadhyas, Pannagas, Gandharvas, Kinnaras, Yakshas, the vultures, Garuda
with his wings, the Suvasan Kinnaras, cows and other quadrupeds, men,
the entire earth, mobile and immobile, the mountains, elephants, lions,
tigers, horses, tusked animals, boars, wolves, deer, elephants with four
white tusks, and creatures, capable of assuming forms at will, were
created. In this Bhāratavarsha the land of eternal religion, Munis again
took birth, with same form, beauty, character and power as they
possessed in the previous Kalpa. Pious men, who had mastered the Vedas
and acquired the knowledge of Atman, created both the external and
internal world through their mental faculties. In the region of Swarga
situate there all the celestials were settled (17–25). Besides all the
householders, who acquire spiritual power through ascetic observances,
those who acquire it through leading the life of celibacy, those who do
it through serving their preceptors, and those who acquire Yoga through
Siddhi, will not be constrained to undertake painful works. Those, who
controlling their minds and with forgiveness and firmness practise
religious rites along with their wives, range in the celestial region
(26-28).