TITLE: INDRA RAVISHES VAPUSTHAMA: VISHWAVASU PACIFIES JANAMEJAYA’S

WRATH.

Souti said:—While the foremost of Rishis thus consoled the king
Janamejaya, his words, relating to the past and future, were heard by
all those who were present in that meeting (1). Their ears were pleased
with (drinking) the juice of that great Rishi’s words like unto the
nectar-carrying rays of the moon (2). Hearing the charming history of
the Bhārata war in which many heroes were killed and which yielded
virtue, worldly profit and desire, some, in that assembly, shed tears
and some engaged in meditation. That chronicle was described by the
Rishi as if it was written on his palm (3-4). Having circumambulated all
the courtiers present there the divine Rishi Vyāsa obtained their
permission and departed saying "I will see you all again" (5).
Afterwards the leading ascetics followed that foremost of Rishis Vyāsa,
the best of speakers. After the departure of the divine Vyāsa and of the
Rishis, the priests and the kings repaired whence they had come (6-7).

Casting off anger like unto a serpent throwing off its venom and
wrecking revenge on those dreadful Pannagas king Janamejaya went away.
With the Homa fire the great Muni Astika saved Takshaka of burning hood
and repaired to his own hermitage. King Janamejaya too, encircled by his
own people, went to the city of Hastināpur and with joy began to govern
his contented subjects. A few days after Janamejaya duly undertook the
celebration of a horse sacrifice accompanied with profuse presents
(8-11).

Having controlled herself according to the rites laid down in the
scripture the worshipful lady Vapusthumā Kāshyā, went to the horse slain
at Janamejaya’s sacrifice, and sat down near it. Desiring for that
perfectly beautiful lady Vāsava entered into the body of the slain horse
and knew her. Beholding that change Janamejaya said to the sacrificing
priest, "This horse has not been slain: kill him at once." Coming to
know of that endeavour of Indra’s the wise priest communicated it to the
royal saint Janamejaya and imprecated a curse on Indra (12–25).

Janamejaya said:—"O Shounaka, if there is any fruit accruing to me for
my penances, protection of the subjects and sacrifice, I swear by it and
tell you some thing; hear; from to-day the Kshatriyas will no more
worship the fickle-minded Indra, who has no control over his mind, with
horse sacrifices" (16–17). Then greatly worked up with anger king
Janamejaya said to the presiding priests:—"While this sacrifice of mine
has been spoiled by Indra, forsooth I know that you have not the least
of a Brāhmana’s energy in you. You should not therefore live in my
territory. Do you go elsewhere with your friends." Thus addressed the
Brāhmanas grew angry with Janamejaya and went away. Thereupon greatly
worked up with anger the highly pious king Janamejaya went inside his
palace and ordered his queens saying "Drive away the unchaste
Vapushthamā from my house who has placed on my head her feet covered
with dust. She has destroyed my glory and fame and spoiled my honor. I
do not wish to see that unchaste wife like a cast off garland. He, who
in this world lives with a wife fond of other men, cannot enjoy sweet
food and sleep happily in a solitary place. He should not enjoy her like
unto spoiled Havi." Saying this, Parikshita’s son, irate, was crying
aloud. The Gandharva princess Vishwāvasu then said to him (18-24):

Vishwavasu said:—O king, thou hast celebrated three hundred sacrifices;
Vāsava therefore cannot forgive you any longer. Vapusthamā, this thy
properly wedded wife, has no fault. She was formerly the Apsarā Rambhā
and is now born as the daughter of the king of Kāshi. Enjoy with this
best of beautiful damsels considering her as a great jewel. Do not ever
leave her. O foremost of Kurus, thou art like Sachi’s lord in riches.
Beholding thee ready to celebrate sacrifices, the king of gods, seeking
holes, has put in obstacles here. O king, thinking that thou wilt
surpass him in fruits of sacrifices, the king of gods has obstructed
this Yajna (25–28). Desirous of throwing an obstacle Vāsava, seeing the
horse slain and seeking loop holes, has employed this illusion here.
Indra has known her thinking her as Rambha whom thou dost regard as
Vapusthamā. Worked up with anger in consequence thereof thou hast cursed
those priests who have officiated at thy three hundred sacrifices and
hast been deprived of the fruits which only Indra is entitled to. And
those preceptors too have been driven away by thee. Vāsava always stood
in fear of thyself and the Brahmanas. By accomplishing this feat through
his illusory power he has been freed from both the fears. How can that
highly powerful Purandara, who is desirous of achieving victories,
ravish the wives of his sons and grand sons which even the ordinary men
do not? As intelligence, virtue, control of senses, spiritual prowess
and glory exist sufficiently in Indra the rider of lions so do they
exist in thee who hast celebrated three hundred sacrifices. Therefore do
not blame Indra, the preceptors, Vapusthamā and thy own self. It is very
difficult to overcome the Destiny (29–35). By virtue of his spiritual
powers the king of gods entered into the horse and excited thy wrath:
but be not worked up with anger. Those, who wish happiness, should
always follow the ways of the Providence (36). It is very difficult to
overcome the adverse destiny as it is to cross the current from a
contrary direction. Therefore desist from the attempt; and shorn of
anxiety do thou enjoy in the company of this jewel of a sinless wife
(37), O king, if ordinary innocent ladies are divorced by men, they
curse the latter. One should never divorce a celestial wife if she is
innocent. Rays of the sun, flames of fire, the sacrificial altar,
oblations and a wife who is not attached by another are never sullied
even when they are touched by others. Wives of good character like the
goddess of prosperity should be always respected, maintained, protected
and adored by the learned (38-49).