TITLE: JANAMEJAYA LIVES HAPPILY: EFFECT OF THE RISHI’S WORDS

Shouti said:—Thus requested by Vishwāvasu Janamejaya, whose mind was
filled with useless anxiety, was propitiated with Vapusthamā and
celebrated a religious rite for the removal of sin. Driving away his
mental labour, desiring for fame and pleasing Vapusthamā the pious
Janamejaya governed his kingdom (1–2). He did not abstain from
worshipping the Brāhmanas, celebrating sacrifices, making gifts and
looking after his State and did not scold Vapusthamā. Continually
meditating with a confident heart on what the Rishis of great penances
had said, _viz._, "It is impossible to overcome the work of Destiny"
king Janamejaya cast off his anger (3-4).

He, who reads these great words of the great Rishi, becomes most
adorable unto men, lives sufficiently long and attains to fruits which
it is difficult (for others) to acquire (5). The man, who reads these
words destructive of the sin of the performer of hundred sacrifices, is
freed from sins, obtains many desired-for objects and lives happily for
a long time (6). As a tree yields fruits originating from flowers and it
springs up again from those fruits, so those words, emanating from the
great Rishi, make him prosperous again (7). By virtue of these words a
son-less man obtains powerful sons, a man, losing his position in the
world, regains it, one is freed from diseases and fetters, and being
endued with accomplishments he performs auspicious works (8). By hearing
these auspicious words of the Rishi the maidens obtain husbands after
their hearts and give birth to powerful and accomplished sons capable of
grinding their enemies (9). Hearing these words the Kshatriyas conquer
the world, and their enemies and acquire immense wealth, the Vaishyas
obtain sufficient properties and the Sudras attain to a better status
(10). Recollecting this episode which has been described to you in the
circle of the Brāhmanas, you, resorting to patience and calmness, range
happily in the world. Thus I have recounted to you the lives and conduct
of the great Rishis of wonderful deeds. Tell me what else you wish to
hear. I will describe it to you (11-13).