TITLE: THE CREATION OF MOUNTAINS AND RIVERS

Vaishampāyana said:—The earth floated over that vast expanse of water
like a boat. On account of the heaviness of her body she did not sink
down (1). The Lord then thought of making divisions of the earth. He
then thought of the height of mountains, the courses of rivers and their
sizes, small or less. Having divided the earth into four continents like
unto four petals of a lotus and separated the oceans he created the
golden mountain Meru (2-4).

Thereupon going to the eastern side he created the (Udaya) rising
mountain a hundred _yojanas_ in extent and a thousand _yojanas_ in
height. With golden summits the fruits of his own energy and effulgent
like the rising sun he completed it with body and base (5–6). That one,
having lotus eyes, created there golden trees of huge stems covered
daily with flowers and fruits (7). The Great God Vishnu next created the
mount Soumanaka which was a hundred _yojanas_ in extent and two hundred
in height. He collected there thousands and thousands of jems and
variegated altars shining like evening clouds. He then created the
mountain of a thousand summits, the abode of hundreds of jems. It was
thickly covered with trees and was sixty yojanas in height. There the
celestial Architect placed his most excellent seat adored of all
creatures. He then created the great mountain Shaishira covered with
forest. Its impassable caves were richly adorned. From it he created the
celebrated river Vasudhāra, originating from dews abounding in birds and
adorned with banks. That river, full of sacred sacrifices, covered the
entire eastern quarter with pearls and conch-shells, daily yielded
ambrosial fruits and flowers, and had profuse shade. It was adorned with
many trees grown on its bank (8-15).

Thereupon having created divisons of the West, the Lord created the
charming mountain of half gold and half silver in the south. Holding on
one side the effulgence of the sun and on the other that of the moon
that best of mountains shone there greatly in beauty (16–17). That
mountain was as if simultaneously spread over with the rays of the sun
and the moon. Thereupon he created in that quarter the huge mountain
Bhānumanta. That mountain was covered with celestial trees conferring
all wished-for fruits. Then he created the mount Kunjara of the shape of
an elephant (18-19). It had golden rooms on all sides and was many
_yojanas_ in extent. He then created the mount Rishabha of the shape of
a bear. It was covered with golden sandal trees and was as if smiling
with flowers. He then created the mountain chief Mahendra a hundred
_yojanas_ in height. It had golden summits and huge blossoming trees.
The Lord created that huge mountain on earth, which, filled with diverse
jems, was effulgent like the sun and the moon. He then created the
mountain Malaya adorned with many blossoming trees (20–23). He then
created the mount Maināka covered with a net of rocks. He placed that
huge mountain in the southern quarter (24). He then created the mount
Vindhyā endued with a thousand summits and covered with various trees
and creepers. He then created the celebrated river Payodhara, full of
milk like sweet water, whirlpools and endowed with spacious banks. That
river beautified the southern quarter (25–26). Having placed in the
southern quarter that sacred river of a hundred branches and many holy
pilgrimages the Lord repaired to the western quarter. There he created a
huge mountain a hundred Yojanas in height. It was adorned with
variegated and golden rocks, caves, Shāla, Tala and other trees shining
like the sun and beautiful altars made of gold. The Lord established
sixty thousand mountains in the Western division. There he created a
Vaidurya mountain named Barāha in imitation of his own boar form. There
were golden and silvery rocks. There he also established the huge
Chakravān mountain of a thousand summits resembling his own discus. He
also created the silvery mountain Shanka covered with dark-blue trees
resembling his conch-shell. On the summit of that mountain he placed the
huge tree Pārijata produced from gold and jems. The Lord Barāha created
in the western division the sacred and celebrated river Ghritadhārā of
profuse water. Having thus created many divisions of the West he
established in the north many golden and beautiful mountains. He then
created the golden mountain Shoumya of the effulgence of the sun and
extent of the sky. Even when divested of the sun the country was lighted
up with its effulgence. As with the heat of the sun the lunar region is
lighted up so as if with the effulgence of that mountain the sun shone.
It appears, from the subtle signs that the sun is giving its heat. Its
thousand summits were filled with various shrines. He then created again
the setting (_Asta_) hill filled with various jems. He then created
there the charming and most beautiful mountains Mandara and Gandhamādana
covered with flowers. On the summit of the latter he created the
wonderful golden river _Jamvu_. He then created the mounts Trishikhara,
Pushkara, Shubhra Pāndura, the foremost of mountains Kailāsha of the hue
of a cloud and the mountain chief Himalaya covered with heavenly
minerals. The Lord, assuming the form of a boar, created in the nothern
division the heavenly river Madhudhārā endued with all virtues and a
hundred mouths. All those mountains had wings and could assume forms at
will. The Lord Paramesthin made them all many coloured. Having thus made
the various divisions of the earth the Lord thought of creating the gods
and Asuras. The divine destroyer of the world, having blood-red eyes,
created, on all sides, for the behoof of mankind, many beautiful hills
and sacred rivers full of water (27-50).