TITLE: VARIOUS KINGS ARE APPOINTED BY BRAHMA

Vaishampāyana said:—O Bharata, the Lord appointed Sakra, effulgent like
the sun, as the king of the three worlds and of the gods (1). Jishnu,
the wielder of thunder-bolt, clad in a coat of mail, was given birth to
by Aditi. That intelligent patron of Srmitis is eulogised by Adhyaryus
(2). As soon as he was born from Aditi the Lord Sakra was covered with
Kuça grass and therefore the king of gods passed by the name of Koushika
(3). Having installed the thousand-eyed Purandara as the Lord Paramount
Brahmā began gradually to distribute other kingdoms. He installed Soma
as the king of Yajnas, asceticism, stars, planets, the twice-born and
herbs. He appointed Daksha the king of patriarchs, Varuna the lord of
waters, the all-destroyer Vaishwānara, the king of the departed manes
and Vayu that of smell, bodiless creatures, sound and ether (4-7). He
conferred on Mahādeva the sovereignty over the goblins, Pishacas,
Matris, cows, evil portends, diseases, calamities, profuse rain, other
disturbances and the evil spirits. He appointed Vaishravana Kuvera as
the king of Yakshas, Rakshasas, Guhyakas, all the jewels and wealth. He
appointed Sesha as the king of all animals having teeth, Vāsuki as that
of Nāgas and Takshaka as that of serpents. He appointed the ocean as the
lord of rivers, rain and waters and Avuryā as the lord of Adityas. He
appointed Chitraratha as the king of Gandharvas and Kāma that of
Apsaras. He appointed the bull, the carrier of Mahadeva, the king of all
quadrupeds. The highly effulgent Hiranyakashipu was appointed the king
of Daityas and Hiranyāksha as the heir apparent. The highly powerful and
first born Viprachitti was appointed the king of Dānavas and Asuras.
Prajāpati appointed Mahākala as the king of Kalakeyas and Vitra that of
the sons of Anāyusha the wife of Twasthā. He appointed the great Asura
Rahu, the son of Sinhikā as the king of all portends and evil omens
(8-16).

O Bhārata, thereupon he appointed _Vatsara_ (year) the king of seasons,
months, cycles, fortnights, days, nights, Tithis, Parvas, Kalās,
Kāsthās, Muhurttas, the two Ayanas, Yoga Sāstra and Mathematics. The
highly powerful Garuda was elected the king of all birds, Suparnas
capable of seeing from a distance and of the Bhogis. Vāsava appointed
Aruna, Garuda’s younger brother, red like a Javā flower, as the king of
the Eastern quarter. The highly illustrious Yama, the dispenser of
justice and the son of the lord Aditya was appointed by Mahendra as the
king of the south. Kashyapa’s own begotten son, who was under water and
was celebrated afterwards by the name of Amburāja, became the king of
the West. And Pulastya’s son the highly effulgent Kuvera, like unto
Mahendra himself, was appointed the king of the north (17–24). Having
thus made out the divisions of the kingdom, the Self-sprung Deity, the
creator of the universe conferred on them severally the celestial
regions. The regions of some were effulgent like the sun, some were like
fire, some were like lightning, and some like the moon. All those
regions were of diverse colors, capable of coursing at will, many
hundred yojanas in extent, easily accessible unto the pious and hard of
attainment for the sinful. The regions, which are beautiful to look at
and are lustrous like the stars, are those of the pious. Those who
celebrate sacrifices with most excellent presents, those who are
faithful to their own wives, forgiving, simple and truthful, those
Brāhmanas who show kindness towards the poor, those who are freed from
covetousness, and the quality of Rajas, and the ascetic sages repair to
those regions. Having thus engaged his own sons Prajapati, the
grand-father of the world, repaired to the Brahmā region called
Pushkara. Having been entrusted by the Self-sprung Deity with the work
of protection and been looked after by Mahendra the celestials lived
happily in their respective regions. Having been duly engaged in the
work of protection all the gods, headed by Shakra, enjoyed their
portions of sacrificial offerings, heaven, fame and joy (25-33).