TITLE: KURUKSHETRA AND THE DUTY OF THE BRAHMANAS

Vaishampāyana said:—Although they listened to the instructions of their
preceptor in the shape of a mountain those Brāhmana house-holders,
devoted to asceticism, could not give up bodily attachment. So the
worship of fire with oblations daily increased and the worship of Vishnu
and preceptors was also introduced. Thus O king, for the purification of
the souls of the Brāhmanas Karma Kānda was introduced in this world by
those Brahmavādins (1-2). Near the mount Vindhya on this earth there is
a sacred province by the name of Kurukshetra which is even, shorn of
thorns and full of woods and twigs by which fire may be lighted.
Performing God’s work with pure heart the great Brāhmana householders
lived there and practised ascetic penances. Even the Yatis with great
eagerness live there for acquiring piety. The Brāhmanas, who have
followed the Vānaprastha mode of life, who perform Agnihotra ceremony,
who have controlled their anger and passions, who wear bark and
deer-skin and who live on unsolicited food, also wish to live there. O
king, gradually obtaining it by the will of the Providence, the
Brāhmanas, with great care observe this mode of life. He, who knows this
sacred initiation which was practised by the Brahmavadi Munis of old,
attains to eternal virtue. Without thoroughly mastering the Vedas one
should not lead the life of a householder, should not observe the most
difficult Brahmachārya, should not live the life of a hermit, and should
not give up the duties of a householder. Save by mastering the Vedas
miseries will never end. To the reciters of the Saman and Yajur Vedas
the Riks are their acquirement. The ascetic Brāhmanas, who wish to live
like householders, can receive instructions of the Vedānta from their
preceptors and reap the fruits thereof. A pious king should compell him
who does not hear the Vedas or celebrate the Vedic rites to act like a
Sudra. On the other hand there is none amongst the Brāhmanas who does
not respect the Vedas. A student or a householder, every Brāhmana
controls his mind when he listens to the enunciation of his duties,
reads the Vedas and receives the instructions. Therefore no king should
disregard a Brāhmana. Therefore a Brāhmana, who acquires the knowledge
of Sāstras, who gains the transcendental knowledge, should thus read the
Vedas and control his senses (3-15).