TITLE: THE WORK OF CREATION AND UPRAISING OF THE EARTH

Vaishampāyana said:—The Vedic Sruti says that formerly this universe of
Brahmā existed in the shape of a golden egg. Thereupon for creating the
world the omnipotent Lord cut off the egg which had its mouth upwards.
The Lord, who was conversant with the knowledge of all divisions, again
divided it into eight parts. The etherial hole which was on the surface
of the egg was converted into the most excellent Brahma region intended
for the virtuous. And the hole underneath was converted into Rasātala.
As the material cause of the universe the Lord created that egg with
eight sorts of holes; and he then divided senses, in the shape of holes,
into gross and subtle elements. And the various parcels of the egg dyed
with diverse colors were converted into variegated clouds. The liquid
substance, that was in the egg, became gold on earth.

O King, as the world is covered with oceans, at the time of the
universal dissolution so the entire universe was covered with the
streaming juice of that egg. And the water, that came out of the egg
which the Lord created formerly for the construction of the celestial
region, became the golden mountains. With that water, all the quarters,
sky, the region of Nāka and all other interstices were covered. And
wherever that water dropped mountains were created. The earth was thick
set with mountains and became impassable. Assailed by those mountains
extending over many Yojanas the earth was pressed down by their weight.
The celestial water, identical with Narāyana which flowed down on earth
became the golden energy. Assailed by that energy and unable to bear it
the earth entered into the region underneath. Seeing the earth enter
into the region underneath, the slayer of Madhu, for the well-being of
all, devoted his attention to raising her (1-16).

The Lord said:—Assailed by the weight of my strength the poor goodess
Earth is going to Rasatala like unto a cow thrown helplessly into mud
(17). The Earth said:—"Salutation unto Purusottama who is endued with
three foot-steps, of incomparable strength, the great man-lion of four
arms, and who bears the mystic mark of Srivatsa on his breast and holds
the bow Shrānga, discus, sword and club (18). O lord, thou dost hold
_Atman_, thou dost uphold the universe, the elements and protect the
world. Thou dost, by thy energy and strength, hold all and I sustain
them afterwards. I cannot sustain what thou dost not uphold. There is no
element which is not supported by thee. O Nārāyāna, at every Yuga, thou
dost, for the behoof of the world, relieve me of my burden. Assailed by
thy energy I am about to enter into Rasātala. I do now seek refuge with
thee. Do thou save me. When I am oppressed by the Dānavas and the
wicked-souled Rākshasas I do seek thy shelter who art eternal and all
truth. When my mind is possessed by fear I, hundreds of times, pray to
thee in my mind who art broad-shouldered and like unto a bull and seek
thy shelter." The Lord said:—"O Earth, do not fear. Be self-controlled
and enjoy peace. I do bring you to your proper place which you wish
(19–26)."

Vaishampāyana said:—Thereupon the great Lord thought in his mind of his
celestial forms and said:—"Assuming what form shall I upraise the
earth?" Then ascertaining how he would raise up the earth sunk under
water, the Lord, sporting in water, thought of his boar-form. Hari, the
upholder of the ground, thus engaged himself in raising up the earth.
That Brahmā form, indentical with worlds, was above the reach of all. It
extended over ten Yojanas, and was a hundred Yojanas in height. It was
like a dark-blue cloud in hue—and its voice was like the muttering of
clouds. It was strong like a huge mountain and had white burning tusks.
It was effulgent like lighting and the rays of the sun. His shoulders
were plump and spacious. His gait was like that of a proud tiger. His
back was elevated and he was endued with all the marks of a bull. Having
thus assumed the form of a huge boar, Hari entered into Rasātala for
raising up the earth. The Vedas were the feet of that boar, the
sacrificial stakes were its teeth, the sacrifice was its hands, _Chiti_
was its mouth, fire was its tongue, Darbha grass was its hair, Brahman
was its head. That Great Yogin was the distributor of days, nights and
moments, was identical with the Vedas and their limbs, and adorned with
Srutis. Having thus assumed the form of a sacrificial boar the preceptor
of the world immediately entered into the region underneath. He held the
earth covered with the mass of water. For the behoof of the world the
Lord entered into Rasātala and upraised the earth with his tusks sunk
down there.

Thereupon reinstating the earth in her proper place the Lord upheld the
upholders of the earth and then released her. On account of her being
held up by him the earth attained to peace and saluted the Lord Vishnu.
Having thus assumed the form of sacrificial boar, the Lord, for the
well-being of all, raised up the goddess Earth. Having raised up the
earth from Rasātala that foremost of Suras, having eyes, devoted his
attention to making various divisions of the world. Having assumed the
form of a huge boar, the highly illustrious Achyuta, of unequalled
prowess, raised up the earth with one tusk for the well-being of the
world (27–48).