TITLE: A DESCRIPTION OF THE EARTH

Vaishampāyana said:—The Eternal Hari then placed Brahmā on that golden
lotus endued with all effulgence, qualities and marks of the earth, and
extending over many a Yojana. He was the foremost of Yogins, the mind of
all creatures and their creator and had his face directed towards all.
The great saints, well-read in the Puranas, describe this lotus, as
originating from Nārayana’s person and supporting the earth (1-3). The
goddess who was the seat of that lotus is earth and the firm roots that
grow inside it are the celestial mountains. Himavan, Meru, Neela,
Nishadha, Kailāsha, Krouncha, Gandhamadana, the sacred Trishira, the
charming Mandara, Udaya, Kandara, Vindhya, and Asta, these are the
mountains granting all objects of desires, and containing the hermitages
of the gods, Siddhas and pious anchorites. The country interspersed by
these mountains is called the insular continent Jamvu and here
sacrificers celebrate their sacrifices. The streams, containing
nectarine water, that come out of the sacrifices, are the goddess
_Sarit_ (river) having and hundreds of sacred shrines. The numberless
filaments around the lotus are known on earth as the mountains of
minerals (4-10).

O king, the upper petals of that lotus constitute the impassable and the
mountainous tract of the Mlechchas. The lower petals constitute the
nether region, the abode of the great Daityas and Uragas; the region
underneath it is called Udaka or the mine of great miseries. Persons
committing heinous crimes are drowned there (11-13). The vast sheet of
water that lies at the extremity of this lotus is the ocean (with land)
on all sides (14). Because this great lotus originated in the mirror of
Narāyana’s heart it is called Pushkara. For this, the great sacrificing
ancient Rishis, who are acquainted with the origin of this lotus,
construct an altar of the shape of a lotus in the sacrificial ground. In
this way the Lord created Brahmā in the lotus the creator of mountains,
rivers, gods, and other objects of the universe. While Brahmā was
created the Great Self-sprung Lord, of unlimited prowess, lying on the
bed of the huge ocean created the eternal lotus identical with the
universe (15-18).