TITLE: THE GREAT BRAHMAN DESCRIBED

Vaishampāyana said:—O king, having controlled your five senses listen
with whole-minded attention to what I say with a pure mind. Know him as
Nishkala Purusha, whom one cannot obtain through Karma, who appears
before persons conversant with the knowledge of Brahman, who is not
attached to actions, who is related to Brahma, who is the unmanifest
cause of the universe, who is eternal, and is with and without form.
Egoism, begotten by Atman, proceeds from this Purusha (1-3). He has a
celestial form, is the lord of the objects of senses, is beyond the
reach of thought, eternal, the origin of Yugas, identical with three
forms of time, and not being born is equal everywhere. Persons, having
the knowledge of Nārayana, know him as separate from the unmanifest. He
comprehends all, courses everywhere, has his head everywhere, sees all,
has his face towards all, hears all and extends over the space. He is
the cause of cause and action, exists as manifest and unmanifest and is
not seen by any body when he moves about (4–7). Although he is beyond
the reach of thought and without any form, yet he, assuming a form and
manifesting himself, ranges everywhere as fire in a wood. He is
identical with past, present and future. He is Parameshthin, Prajāpati
and the lord of the worlds. This name of His Has been truly sung. That
unmanifest one becomes manifest through Brahma Yoga. Ahankāra has been
begotten by ignorance proceeding from Nārāyana (8-10). This Purusha with
the consciousness of self exists as Brahma. He is the lord of the world
mobile and immobile and is called Brahmā.

The Lord, whose creation is this universe, who is the origin of all,
said "I will create all." When Brahma said this the consciousness of ego
was produced from nature and thus the whole world was brought into
being. But the true, Omni-present Brahma, devoid of qualities, remained
as Brahma. From the five subtle elements, the attributes of the
unmanifest Brahma, emanated the Vedas and their various branches
(11-15). Thereupon commanded by Brahma through whom every thing becomes
manifest Brahmā took a form from nature and created water. Afterwards
amongst creators following the command of Iswara, the seventh Brahmā
created air as before, held it and passed by the name of Dhatri.
Formerly when this universe, produced by air, was submerged under water
the Tarjasa celestials raised it up and now the whole universe is
manifest. When Iswara felt a desire for creating the earth for placing
his creation he converted a portion of water into solid substance and
the other remained liquid: and so the people perceived the earth
(16–19). On account of the water being converted into a solid substance
the Purusha Bhu rose up and filling all the quarters with a grave sound
said:—"I wish to live above water. On account of the water being turned
solid I am being afflicted and worn out. Therefore hold me up."
Afterwards Prithivi, Earth, spread everywhere and upholding all
creatures desirous of having some room, assumed a form and said "Raise
me up." Hearing those sweet words Hari assumed the form of a boar and
jumped down into the great ocean. Having performed the most difficult
task of raising up the Earth from water he so engaged himself in Samādhi
(mental concentration) that nobody could see him. He, who assuming the
form of a boar raised up the Earth, is the effulgent Brahma. Some know
him as Akāsa (ether). Brahmā, the creator of all, originated from Him.
That Iswara, the origin of all, through his subtle mental Yoga of Jnana,
is still upholding the earth in the shape of the serpent and tortoise,
for the well being of the world. Riving the interior of the earth and
water which produced it the sun, as if smiling, stationed himself on
high. From the solar region, full of heat emanated the lunar region full
of water. Because the moon emanated from the Eternal knowledge and was
gifted with His supreme knowledge he was called Soma (Sa-Brahma and Uma,
knowledge of Brahman) (20-28). From the end of the lunar region emanated
air (vital breath). He began to nurse the Vedas explaining the causes of
all phenomena (29). Through his knowledge of Yoga and on account of his
nature originating from Brahman he created a celestial and eternal
Purusha (30). His liquid state became water and his solid state earth;
his holes became the sky and the luminous portion became the eye (31).
The principle of Mahat, emanating from Brahman as Purusha and begotten
by effulgence, agitates the body through air, when united with five
elements (32). Jiva or the human soul exists eternally as _Jnāna_ in
Buddhi: only Isvara knows it (33). The fire or self which exist
eternally in the body united with the five elements is the sun (i.e.
supreme soul) (34). On account of the pristine actions the human soul
either advances (in spiritualism) or goes down, either enjoys happiness
or suffers misery (35). Stupified by the senses and therefore ignorant
of (the true form of) Brahman one meets with birth or death on account
of his Karma (action) (36). As long as a man is not identified with the
Supreme Brahman so long he passes through repeated births in this world
(37). When by virtue of Yoga he gets mastery over his senses he becomes
at one with Brahman and enjoys true happiness (38). Yet separating
himself from this world (of changes) he becomes identical with Brahman:
he is not then led to ruin by anger (and other passions) nor becomes
attached to objects of senses (39). This ominiscient person, who has
acquired the highest spiritual powers, enters into the essence of
elements. He then knows the birth and death. That man, conversant with
the true form of Brahman, acquires the knowledge of the means of
emancipation and the past and future actions and attains to a most
excellent status (40-41). By his _manas_ (mind) he conquers all the
intellectual faculties and all other desires that agitate the mind as
the wind disturbs the ocean (42). Through the eye of _Jnāna_ (spiritual
knowledge) the soul of a man, who conquers all the desires.
contaminating his mind, is released from all the fetters of the body
(43). The Yogin, having a subtle body, can, through spiritual science,
create or destroy the next world and can create even this world (44).
He, who has his mind, fixed on the Supreme Soul, can release those who,
on account of their pristine deeds, have taken birth in a degraded
order. (45). Action leads both to emancipation and enjoyment. But he who
has immersed himself in the Brahman has no action leading to worldly
enjoyments (46).