TITLE: AN ACCOUNT OF JANAMEJAYA’S FAMILY

Shounaka said:—O son of Lomaharshana, who are the sons of Janamejaya?
And by whom the family of Pandavas was founded? I have been stricken
with curiosity to hear this history. I wish therefore to learn every
detail about it as you have said (1-2).

Souti said:—Parikshit’s son Janamejaya begat on his wife Kāshyā two
sons, the king Chandrāpida and Suryāpida who was conversant with the
knowledge of emancipation. By performing works befitting the Kshatriyas,
the hundred sons of Chandrāpida, who were all clever archers, acquired
celebrity on earth under the appellation of Janamejayas (3–4). Of them
the eldest Satyakarana of long arms, the performer of many sacrifices
accompanied with profuse gifts, was installed on the throne of
Hastināpur. Satyakarna’s son the virtuous and powerful Swetakarna had no
issue and he therefore entered into woods with his spouse (5–6). The
beautiful Yadu princess Mālini, of fair eye-brows, conceived through the
forest-ranging Swetakarna. Just in the beginning of this conception the
patriarch Swetakarna entered like his fore-fathers into woods for good
(7-8). Beholding her husband retire into forest, Mālini, who was quick
with a child, followed him, and on the way gave birth to a son having
eyes like lotus petals. As Draupadi followed her husbands in the days of
yore so the chaste and noble Mālini followed her consort leaving the
new-born baby behind. While that tender baby, divorced from his mother,
was crying in the mountain cave, some cranes, stricken with compassion
for the great prince, came there (9–11). Seeing that crying prince
Shravistha’s sons the Rishis Paippaladi and Koushika felt compassion and
took him up. They then washed with water his two sides which were
bruised against the rock and covered with blood. The sides of the prince
were dark-blue like those of a goat and were high and well-formed. He
therefore passed by the name of Ajapārsha. Thereupon those two foremost
of the twice-born (Paippaladi and Koushika) named him Ajapārsha and
brought him up in the house of a Rishi named Vemaka (12–14). Vemaka’s
wife brought up Ajapārsha as her son, so he became Vemaka’s son and
those two Brāhmanas became his councillors. Ajapārsha and the sons and
grand-sons of Paippaladi and Koushika lived the same life. This
Ajapārsha, born in the race of Puru, founded the family of the Pandavas
(15-16). Formerly while transferring his decrepitude Nashusha’s son the
intelligent Yayāti sang this verse: "Earth will forsooth be divested of
the sun, moon and planets but she will never be shorn of the Purus
(17–18)."