TITLE: KALI-YUGA DESCRIBED

Janamejaya said:—When the whole world will thus be sullied, by whom men
will be protected? How will they behave? What will they take and how
will they enjoy? What will be their actions and endeavours? How long
will they live? And meeting with what end will they attain to
Satya-Yuga? (1–2).

Vyasa said:—When religion will be shaken and good conduct will be
extinct, men, shorn of accomplishments, will be short-lived. With the
decrease of the duration of life, there will be decay of strength. It
will lead to the perversity of colour which will produce diseases. This
will give birth to repentence which will beget the consciousness of the
God. And this will produce again virtue. With this end they will attain
to the Satya Yuga. Some, observing virtue in words only, will grow
indifferent and some, being conscientious, will, with curiosity, enquire
into causes. Having their minds freed from doubts, some men, proud of
their learning, will find out unity between inference and evidence
(3–7). Others will disprove the Vedas. The wicked and ignorant men,
proud of their learning, will be atheists. They will be proud and
divorced from the knowledge of Sastras. They will have reverence for the
apparent meaning and be fond of discussions. When at the revolution of
the cycle religion will be shaken people will follow the last (Vishnu’s)
dispensation; and with gifts and truthfulness they will perform many
merciful acts (8-11). During that period people will eat every sort of
things, be of uncontrolled senses, devoid of accomplishments and
shameless. Know this as the consummate sign of sinfulness. When the
Kshatriyas and other orders, will resort to begging, the eternal means
of subsistence unto the Brāhmanas, for their livelihood know it as the
sign that sin has set in. When this cycle, destructive of knowledge and
learning, will be filled with sin, people, leading the life of celibacy,
will attain to the consummation of spiritualism within a short time. In
the last cycle will take place great wars, great tumults, great showers
and fears: know these to be the signs of sinfulness. In the end of the
Yuga the Rakshasas will assume the forms of the Brāhmanas and the kings,
bent upon speaking harsh words, will enjoy the earth. When men, divorced
from the study of the Vedas, celebration of sacrifices and morals,
proud, avaricious, eating all, performing useless rites, stupid,
selfish, covetous, putting on worthless dresses, mean, deviating from
the eternal religion, the stealers of other’s riches, the ravishers of
others’ wives, lustful, wicked, deceiptful and brave, will be born with
equal character the various ascetics will hide themselves (12–20). With
words men will worship those persons, devoted to the God, who were born
in the Krita age (21). Men will steal corns, raiments, edibles and even
dry cow-dung (22). The thieves will steal the property of other thieves
and murderers will kill other murderers. When thieves will kill the
other thieves people will fare well (23). When the world will be
impoverished, oppressed and divorced from evening prayers and when all
the orders will live in the same style men, pressed down by the weight
of taxes, will retire into woods (24). The sons will engage the father
in all works and the daughter-in-law will make the mother-in law work.
And when sacrifices will be stopped the disciples will pain the
preceptor with wordy shafts. The Rākshasas, the voracious animals,
insects, mice and serpents will injure men. O king, in the close of the
cycle, peace, prosperity, health, friends and literature of the people
will suffer decrease. Being themselves their own masters and thieves,
kings, loaded with the miseries of the cycle, will roam in circles in
various countries. Travelling in their own countries and growing
useless, men, with their friends, will await the appointed time (25–29).
Assailed with fear and hunger and carrying their sons on their shoulders
men will cross the Koushiki and seek shelter in the provinces of Anga,
Banga, Kalinga, Kashmira, Mekala and Rishikāntagiri. Men will live with
the Mlechchas on the sides of the Himalaya, the bank of the ocean of
salt water or in the forests. The earth will be shorn and yet not shorn
of its inhabitants. Although armed the guards will not do their duties.
Men will live on deer, fish, birds, beasts of prey, serpents, insects,
vegetables, fruits and roots (30–34). Like Munis men will collect
themselves and put on bark, leaves and deer-skin. Although living in
mountain caves they will grow anxious for knowing and eating paddy
growing in villages or in the forest. They will with care rear up sheep,
goats, asses and camels (35-36). Living on the bank of rivers for water
they will obstruct the currents. And they will sell and buy cooked food
amongst themselves. For taking their own shares the sons will fight over
the capital. Under the influence of the age people will have children,
have none and will be shorn of the good marks of their families. People,
in that cycle, will follow a degraded faith preached by a degraded
person. The duration of a man’s life will be thirty years. And attacked
by fever they will grow weak and lose their wealth; their physical
organs will be enfeebled by diseases and they will be visited by sorrow
consequent upon the decrease of their longevity. They will be busily
engaged with visiting and serving the pious and on account of the wane
of their conduct they will attain to Satya-Yuga. They will practise
pious rites because they will not get objects of desire; and they will
shrink from committing oppressions on account of their weakness
proceeding from the destruction of their own men (37-43).

Thus making gifts, observing truth and cherishing reverence for the
safety of their own lives they will satisfy the four-fold duties and
meet with well-being. Amongst those men rolling with the senses and
their objects, some will acquire the true knowledge and say "Whether
virtue or death has sweet fruits." As decline gradually takes place so
does advancement. Afterwards when religion will be completely followed
by men Krita-yuga will set in. As the moon increases in the light half
of the month and decreases in the dark half, so good conduct multiplies
in the Krita-Yuga and suffers decrease in the Kali. However the time is
one: according to increase and decrease, Satya, Treta, Dwāpara and Kali
are its four stages. As the moon is enshrouded by darkness in the dark
fortnight and becomes full in the light fortnight so virtue increases in
the Satya and decreases in the Kali Yuga. As a man does not regard an
ancestral lump of gold covered with dust as gold and thinks himself
poor, and again considers himself rich when he finds it gold after it is
cleansed, so when the great soul is covered with Māyā pervaded by the
quality of darkness, men call it a creature and when it is divorced from
Māya they call it pure intelligence. It is thus said in the Vedas and
the learned men also have explained its meaning. By penances having
heaven etc., for their object, eternal fruits are begotten: these fruits
produce gunas or qualities and thus their actions are accomplished. By
these truthful actions even body is not liberated. The fruits of actions
follow the country, time and worthy person in various Yugas: and thus
difference is seen in them. So the Rishis have said; in various cycles
differences in worldly profit, objects of desire, adoration of the
deities and duration of life, are created. As according to the nature of
the Providence the revolution of cycles takes place, so the rise and
decay takes place in the world which cannot stand inactive even for a
moment (44–53).