TITLE: THE CREATION OF THE VEDAS

Vaishampāyana said:—Thus desirous of creating the universe the Lord
began to think. While he was thus meditating a Purusha came out of his
mouth. Arriving before the Lord, the Purusha asked "What shall I do?"
The Lord, the master of the universe, smilingly replied:—"Divide
yourself into two." Saying this, the Lord disappeared. O Bhārata, when
the Lord disappeared bodily no relic of his movement was seen there like
unto a lamp put out. Then the Hiranyagarbha, who is sung in the Vedas,
began to meditate on the words uttered by Him. Formerly the Lord of the
universe was the only Patriarch therefore he alone is entitled to
sacrificial offerings.

The Patriarch said:—The Great one asked me to divide myself into two,
but I have a great doubt regarding the division of Self into two. When
the Patriarch was thinking thus the word _Om_ was recited; with its
sound the earth, sky, and heaven were filled. When Prajapati’s mind was
practising _Om_ again from the heart of the god of gods, sprang
_Vashatkar_. Again originated the three great sacred words _Om_, _Bhur_,
_Bhuva_, etc., with which the heaven, earth and sky are filled.
Afterwards was produced the sacred _Gayatri_ of twenty-four words the
originator of metres. Completely recollecting that celestial verse
Prajapati created Savitri. The Lord then created the four Vedas, Rik,
Saman, Atharvan and Yayush with their accompanying religious rites
(1-11).

Thereupon from his mind emanated Sana, Sanaka, Sanātana, Barava,
Sanandana, and the omnipotent Sanatkumar. With Rudra these six Rishis
are the mind-begotten sons of Brahma. In Yoga Tantra the Yatis and the
Brāhmanas speak highly of these six Rishis, Brahmā and Kapila.
Afterwards the Self-sprung Deity created his eight mind-begotten sons
namely Marichi, Atri, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, Bhrigu, Angira and Maru
and the Pitris of all creatures, gods, Asuras and Rakshasas. At the end
of Nishesha Kalpa, the termination of the thousand Yugas, all these and
their offspring disappeared from the world. Again after a thousand years
these celestial Yogins, capable of procreating progeny, will again take
birth. For a particular work with the end of every cycle the gods change
their names and births. From Prajāpati’s right thumb the divine Daksha
was born. His wife was born from Brahma’s left thumb. Daksha begat on
that wife his celebrated daughters the mothers of the world. O king,
with their progeny the whole world is covered. Thinking in his mind
about the multiplication of his progeny Daksha conferred his daughters,
Aditi, Diti, Kātā, Anāyu, Sinhikā, Muni, Prādhā, Krodhā, Surabhi,
Vinatā, Surasā, Danu and Kadru on Kashyapa. Daksha gave his ten
daughters namely Arundhati, Vasu, Yāmi, Lamvā, Bhimā, Marudvati,
Sangkalpa, Muhurtta, Sādhyā and Vishwā, on Brahmā’s son, Manu. Then he
conferred his beautiful daughters of blameless limbs, having lotus like
eyes and full-moon-like countenances, namely Kirti, Lakshmi, Dhriti,
Pushti, Buddhi, Medhā, Kriya, Mati, and Lajjā, on Dharma. Then was born
Atri’s son Atreya full of water. He was of a thousand rays, the lord of
planets and the dispeller of darkness. Prāchetas Daksha conferred on him
his most excellent twenty-seven daughters, Nakshatra, Yogini, Rohini,
etc. Hear, I will name the progeny of Kashyapa, Manu, Dharma and Shashi.
Kashyapa begat on Aditi the gods Aryamā, Varuna, Mitra, Pusha, Dhātā,
Purandara, Twashta, Bhaga, Angsha, Savita and Parjanya. We have also
heard that Kashyapa begat on Diti two sons. They were Hiranyakashipu and
the powerful Hiranyaksha. They were endued with incomparable prowess and
like unto Kashyapa in asceticism. Hiranyakashipu had five sons who were
all very powerful. They were Pralhāda, Anulava, Sanglahda, Hlāda and
Anulhada. Pralhāda had three highly powerful sons, namely Virochana,
Jambha and Kujāmbha. Virochana’s son was Bali whose only son was Vāna.
His son was Indradamana, the victor of hostile cities. Danu had numerous
children who were all celebrated as great Asuras in the world. Of them
the first-born Viprachitti became the king. Krodhā had many sons and
grand-sons who were called Krodhavashas. They were highly dreadful and
ruthless. Singhikā gave birth to Rāhu who assailed the sun and the moon.
He devours the moon and destroys the sun. Kāta’s children were like unto
Death, highly dreadful effulgent, like dark blue clouds and had eyes
shining like the sun. Kadru had many sons of whom the thousand headed
Sesha, Vāsuki and Takshaka acquired ascendancy. They were all virtuous,
well-read in the Vedas, engaged in doing good unto creatures, givers of
boons and capable of assuming forms at will. Vinatā’s sons were Tarksha,
Aristhanemi, the highly powerful Garuda, Aruna and Aruni. Pradhā gave
birth to the daughters Anavadyā, Anukā, Anunā, Arunapryā, Anuga, Subhagā
and the eight holy Apsaras worshipped even by the celestial saints.
Alamvasha, Misrakeshi, Pundarikā, Tilottamā, Surupa, Lakshmanā, Kshemā,
Rambhā, Mandramā, Asitā, Suvahu, Suvritta, Sumukhi, Supryā, Sugandhyā,
Surasā, Pramathini, Kāshya and Shāradvati were celebrated as Manneya
Apsaras. Vishwāvasu and Bharanya were known as Gandharvas; Menakā,
Sahajanyā, Parnini, Punjikasthata, Kratusthata, Ghitachi, Vishwāchi,
Urvashi, Anumlochā, Pramlochā and Manovati, these ten were the
celebrated Apsaras. From Prajāpati’s determination were produced
ambrosia, liked by the whole world, the Brāhmanas, the cows and the
Rudras. They have been all described in the Purana as the offspring of
Subrahi. I have thus described the progeny of Kashyapa, I will now
describe that of Manu.

O sinless one, I will describe them to you in brief. Vishwā gave birth
to Vishadevas and Sādhyā to Sādhyas. Marudvati gave birth to Maruts and
from Vasu Vasus were born. Bhānu’s sons were Bhanus, Muhurtta’s were
Muhurttajas and Lamvā gave birth to Ghosha. Jāmi gave birth to Nāgadithi
and Arundhati gave birth to all the objects of the world. Sangkalpa gave
birth to Sangkalpa, and Lakshmi gave birth to Dharma’s son Kāma, the
most favourite of the world. Kāma begat on his wife Rati two sons Harsha
and Yasha. Soma begat on his wife Rohini the great lord Varshā by whom
the moon becomes effulgent as soon as he rises. Thus thousands of wives
and sons were born. This is the root of the world. The Lord Prajāpati
distributed powers amongst creatures according to their merit. The Lord
then created the ten quarters, the earth, Rishis, oceans, birds, trees,
herbs, serpents, rivers, gods, demons, the sky-rangers, sacrifices and
mountains (12–60).