TITLE: VISHNU KILLS MADHU

Vaishampāyana said:—Beholding Madhu’s overthrow in Pushkara, all the
creatures, filled with joy, sang and danced on all sides (1). As if
riving the sky with its golden summits covered with various mineral
substances the foremost of mountains Supārshwa shone there (2). The
mountains covered all over with minerals shone there with elevated
summits like unto clouds charged with lightning (3). On account of their
summits being covered with sand and powdered coal raised by the wind
they appeared like so many huge clouds. The mountains, whose summits
were covered with clouds, whose trees were scattered with their wings,
from which was produced profuse gold, were as if stationed in the sky.
Raised by the wind the winged mountains, having their summits covered
with golden minerals, struck terror unto all birds. The golden mountains
were covered with crystal, emeralds and sapphires. The huge mountain
Himalaya was covered with white minerals. And when his golden summits
and wings are lighted up by the rays of the sun they display various
sorts of jems. The huge mountain Mandara, filled with crystal and
containing two gateways built of Vajra, shone like the celestial region.
The mount Kailāsha, adorned with various minerals, its high summits like
unto so many gate ways, and trees covered with Gandharvas playing on
musical instruments, the Kinnarras singing and the celestial maidens,
making various gestures, appeared like a sporting mountain (4-12).

With Madhu’s singing, acting, dancing, playing the mount Kailāsa excited
desire like unto Cupid (13). Vishnu, in the shape of the earth, blue
mount Vindhya with summits like unto clouds stricken with the rays of
the sun, stationed on the mount Meru, sent down showers on earth through
clouds (14-15). With rising clouds the mountains discharge pure water,
various rocks, mineral substances; and through springs they discharge
water clear like crystal. After the end of the rainy season trees, like
unto clouds charged with lightning, shine being adorned with flowers.
The elephants have been adorned with various ornaments of gold. Hanging
and blossoming creepers, supported by trees filled with birds, are as if
dancing on being shaken by the wind. And during the spring the creepers,
shaken by a gust of wind, like unto waves striking against the bank, are
pouring blossoms like unto drops of water. The earth has been covered
with various huge tres covered with fruits. As if singing songs the
trees, fond of honey and birds, are announcing the approach of Cupid.
The Divine Vishnu, the destroyer of Madhu, created a river of currents.
That stream had many fountains, profuse water and beautiful landing
places. The shrines, situate on its bank, were charming and beautiful.
It was full of clear water and carried fragrance of flowers (16–23).
Enlightened by the Vedic words "There is nothing else but thee" she
enters into the Yogin’s heart. Enlightened by the Vedic words, and
assuming the form of Kapil (_i.e._ the balanced state of the three
qualities) in yoga she yeilds milk (_i.e._ unfolds spiritual science)
(24–25). When all the intellectual faculties are destroyed only Pure
consciousness remains; the three universal tendencies (Gunas) resort to
the material body only for knowing the subtle element. Thereupon the
Yogin, with mental concentration, adores the highly wonderful, eternal
and pure Atman. Brahman, in the shape of pure _Jnāna_, crossing over all
objects of consciousness like water in a desert, pervades the entire
creation. The beautiful, well-formed illusory Māyā covers the celestial
Atman. When the cover of Avidyā is removed one can see Atman. The
consciousness of ego is invincible like a mountain. It depends on the
three universal tendencies or Gunas. It exists eternally and is served
even by the Siddhas (29).