TITLE: THE DURATION AND CHARACTERISTICS OF YOGA

Vaishampāyana said:—O Janamejaya, the learned have described the
Satya-Yuga as extending over four thousand years. And to each period of
junction, at the commence ment and termination, has been alloted four
hundred years (1). Virtue had at that time four legs and sin one, and
men, observant of their own duties, used to celebrate sacrifices. During
that age the Brāhmanas used to perform their own duties, the kings used
to follow their own duties, the Vaishyas were busy with the work of
cultivation and the Sudras with serving (others) (2-3). Truth, the
quality of goodness and religion flourished and people used to receive.
instruction from others for following the pious (4). O Bhārata, such was
the conduct of all men in the Krita-Yuga whether of the
religiously-minded or of persons born in low lives (5).

The duration of the Tretā-Yuga was three thousand years and that of its
commencement and termination severally extended over three hundred years
(6). During that period virtue had three legs and sin two. Truth and the
quality of goodness continued intact as in the Krita-Yuga. Desiring for
the fruits of religious practices mankind was vitiated. And accordingly
the religious rites of the four orders suffered deterioration and they
grew weak. O king, thus the work of the Tretā-Yuga, as ordained by the
gods, has been described to you. Listen now to the work of Dwāpara
(7–9). O foremost of Kurus, the duration of Dwāpara extended over two
thousand years and that of its two periods of conjunction was two
hundred years each (10). During that age wise Brāhmanas were born as
being selfish, possessed by the quality of Rajas (self-centering
tendency), deceiptful, mean-minded and of perverted nature. Virtue had
two legs and sin three and therefore the bridges of eternal religion
were gradually perverted (11-12). True Brahmanahood disappeared, faith
in God was shattered, and Vrata, fasts and other religious rites were
abandoned (13). The duration of the Kali-Yuga is one thousand years that
of its two periods of conjunction is one hundred each (14). During this
period virtue has one leg and sin has four. Men are born as being
lustful and possessed by the quality of Tamas (disorganizing tendency).
None practises fast, none behaves like a pious man and none speaks the
truth. Every man becomes an atheist or Brahma-vādin. Everyone becomes
haughty and devoid of the feeling of affection. The Vipras will behave
like the Sudras and the Sudras will be endued with the characteristics
of the Brāhmanas (15-17). In the Kali-Yuga people will violate the
Ashramas, procreate offspring by promiscuous intercourse and know women
whom they should not know. Thus, O Janamejaya, twelve thousand years
constitute a Yuga and seventy-one Yugas constitute a Manawantara. At the
time of the termination of a cycle no one doubts the three Vedas. The
learned consider twelve thousand celestial years as constituting a Yuga.
And a thousand of such Yugas forms one day of Brahmā’s (18–20).

O Bhārata, after the passing away of this day the great lotus-navelled
Deity, the lord of great elements, witnesses the decay of the body of
the Brāhmanas, Daityas, Dānavas, Yakshas, Rakshas, Gandharvas, Kinnaras,
Apsarās, celestial Rishis, Brahma Rishis, Royal Rishis, serpents,
mountains, rivers, beasts, birds, deer and other creatures. Then
resorting to his world-destroying intelligence he performs dreadful
feats for bringing the universe into dissolution (21-25). In the form of
the sun he takes away the vision of all creatures, in the shape of the
wind he takes away their vital breaths, in that of the fire he consumes
all the worlds and in that of the cloud he again sends down unfavourable
showers (26).