TITLE: THE CREATION OF A LOTUS AFTER DISSOLUTION

Vaishampāyana said:—Having taken his birth as the Brāhmana saint Apava
Vashistha and covered his own vessel body the Lord began to practise
penances (1). Afterwards the great Vasishtha, the soul of the universe
and of unlimited powers, thought of creating the five great elements and
other creatures. When the universe was divested of the sky, became
subtle and submerged in water Vasisthā, having his intellectual
faculties increased by the practice of penances, spent a long time.
Living in water and agitating the great ocean he rose up as the subtle
ether with the second wave. He then appeared in the ether as sound
produced by the air and the great Vasistha began to grow up as the air.
When the ocean was agitated by the increasing and powerful wind the
waves struck one another. When the water of the ocean was agitated the
powerful Lord appeared as the fire of dark ways. The fire dried up the
water of the great ocean; from it arose the sky like a hole. From his
own energy was produced nectar-like pure water, from it the ether, from
it air and from the crushing of waves was produced earth. Seeing it the
Lord, the origin of the great elements, was highly pleased. Beholding
the elements the Lord of many forms, cognizant of the necessity and
order of the creation of the universe, began to think of objects for
Brahmā. Thus at the end of a Yuga and many Yugas Brahmā took his birth.
He, who is endued with knowledge, the foremost of the Yogins, who sees
the Soul of the universe, who is a Brāhmana of controlled senses amongst
the twice-born of the world, is Brahmā.

The Lord Brahma, conversant with Yoga, engages Brahmā, endowed with
perfect spiritual powers and worshipped of all, in creating the Vedas
and the objects of the universe.

Thereupon, for the purpose of creating creatures the Eternal Hari lay in
the great ocean, and sporting in diverse ways, attained to great
delight. He then created from his navel a golden lotus with a thousand
petals, effulgent like the sun. Originating from the person of the great
Achyuta there shone in beauty that lotus, effulgent like the burning
flames of fire, fragrant and lustrous like the clear autumnal sun
(2-17).