HTL 


00142884 


294 592 
Puy/Svri 


142884 


| 


i ASHATIC Sie OF mf 
Fown Hall, Bombay, 


ees 


| ~~ -_—-~——. — | 
—-—— - 


Digitized with financial assistance from the 
Government of Maharashtra 
~~ 0n 10 March, 2016 


PROSE ENGLISH TRANSLATION 


OF 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


J al 


EDITED AND PUBLISHED BY 


MANMATHA NATH Dorm, M.A. M.BAS. 


» Author of the English Translation of the Ramayana, Viskuu- 


 puranam, Gita and other works. 


Ts 


14988. | 
PRINTED BY ae C. Dass, F 
Exysiva Press, 65,2 Beavox STREET. 
3. 
CALCUTTA: J 


ee 


) - 1895. 


+ 


- 
| 
| 
7 


ZZ4-F 3: 


—UQu.N 


'‘ CONTENTS. 


ean 


: BOOK VII. 


Cuaprer I—The curse of Brahmanas upon Hiranyakasipu for 
his enmity towards Prahlada, fhe follower of Vishnu. P. t. 

Citarrer II.—The instructions of Hiranyakasipu to Danavas. P. 6. 

Cuaprer II1.—The whole world grows terrified at the devout 
penance of Hiranyakasipu, and Brahma confers boon upon him. 

P. 13. 

Cuaprer IV.—By Brahma’s boo Hiranyakasipu subdues all the 

Lokapalas, and being inimical towards Vishnu, oppressed ali people. 
P. 17. 

Cuapter V.—Neglecting his preceptor’s instructions Prahlada’ 

cherishes reverence towards Vishnu; attempts for his destruction by 
various means but to no purpose. P, 22. 

- Cuapter VI.—Pralhada’s instructions to Daitya boys as com- 
municated by Narada. P. 28. , 

Cuarrer VII.—To create confidence in them Pralhada says that 
he heard of thent when he was in his mother’s womb. P. 32. 

Cuapter VIII.—The destruction of Hiranyakasipu by Vishnu 
in his man-lion shape. P. 38. . 

Cnarter 1X.—The adoration of the Lord by Prathada. P. 47. % 

Cuapter X.—The disappearance of Vishnu and the description 
off his favour towards Rudra. P. 56. Sue, 

Cuarter X1.—The description of the duties of men in general, 
those of different castes and of women. P. 64. , 

Cuaprer XII.—The duties of Brahmacharis and of those living 
in hermitage ; the duties of four orders. P. 68. e 

Carter XIII.—The duties of Yotis arid the history of Abadhuta. 

Z P. 72. 

CuarterR XIV.—The duties of a householder in general, and 

in particular with reference to place and time. P. 77. 
. Cuaprer XV.—The characteristics of final liberation. P. 82. 


BOOK VTITI. 


CHAPTER I. 


Ou ! salutation unto the auspicious Krishna. 

THE AUSPICIOUS KING said:—O Brahmana! the Great 
One is said to be the friend and beloved of all created beings, 
and to look with an equal eye on them. How was it then, 
that like a partial being, he killed the Daityas, in the inter- 
est of Indra? No good could possibly have been dune by 
the celestials, to him whose Self is all ecstacy. He harbour- 
ed no fear from the Asuras; he bore no malice to any 
body, for he transcends the Principles. O illustrious sage! 
thus, great doubts, regarding the grace and wrath of Narayana, 
have arisen in our minds. Thou ought to dispel them. 

THE AUSPICIOUS SAGE said :—O great king! Thou hast 
done well in questioning me about the mysterious character 
of Hari; for (an audition of) the glories of that great devotee 
(of Hari, Prahlada), increases devotion towards Him. This 
highly hallowed glory of Prahlada is sung by Ndrada and 
other sages. Having duly saluted the sage Krishna (Vyasa), 
I shall relate unto thee, an account of (the life and character of) 
Hari. The almighty Being transcends Prakriti, and is devoid 
‘of all attributes; he is unrevealed and has no beginning. 
By presiding over the Principles arising out of his own 
illusive energy, he becomes the cause of all friendship and 
enmity. Goodness, energy, and dulness, are the attri- 
butes of Prakriti, and not of the soul. O king! their conjoint 


2 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


decrease or increase is not possible. During the season 
of the ascendancy of goodness, it seeks the celestials and 
sages ; energy, the Asuras; and dulness, in ‘harmony with 
the times, Yakhas and Rakshasas. He reveals himself like 
light and other things; and cannot be comprehended from 
the ideas entertained about the forms of gods and other 
beings. The experts only come to know the true nature of — 
Him located in the soul, by an introspective examination of 
theic own soul. When the primary Being is willing to 
create the corpus for Self, he separately creates Energy, 
(which beforé now, was resting in perfect harmony with the 
“other two principles) by means of His own illusive power. 
The lord, desirous of sporting in the various bodies, creates 
Goodness, and willing to destroy them, he brings forth 
Duliness. O God among’ men! that Deity of unfailjng 
ss hacen creates this ever-flowing tide of Time which is 
Pie tefuge of the primary pair—Prakriti and Purusha. O 
ing! this Time, which is a part of the Lord himself, helps 
in the aggrandisement of the hosts of the celestials, in whom 
Goodness is the ruling principle. Beloved of the gods and of 
high fame, he destroys the Asuras—~the enemies of the 
celestials, in whom energy and dullness predominate. O 
king in days gone-by, at his great sacrifice, on the foeless 
Yudhisthira asking the divine sage Narada about it, the latter 
out of the love he bore towards him, delivered a discourse, 
illustrating this point. O king! king Yudhisthira, son of 
Pandu, seeing, in the course of the great Rajashuya 
sacrifice, the marvellous absorption of the Lord of Chedi in 
the almighty Vasudeva, was greatly astonished in his mind ; 
and asked the celestial sage Narada present in that sacrifice 
in the following manner, whilst the other sages listened to 
him. 
THE AUSPICIOUS YUDHISTHIRA said :—Indeed it is strange 
to see the inimical Chaidya attain the supremely divine Vasu- 
deva, who is attained with difficulty even by the best devotees, 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 3 


O great sage! we and all present here, are very solicitous of 
being acquainted with this subject. The king Vena was 
condemned to an abode in hell by the twice-born ones for 
having. reviled the Mighty Lord of the Universe: This in- 
iquitous son of Damaghosh, even from the time when he was 
lisping, up to the present moment, was very envious of 
Govinda; so was also the perverted Dantavakra. Neither 
were the tongues of these two wretches, given to running 
down the Supreme Brahma, the undeteriorating Vishnu, 
Striken with leprosy, ‘nor were they condemned to 
dwell in darkest Hell. How then could these two persons be 
merged in the great One, of incomprehensible nature, even 
before the very eyes of the lookers on. This confuses my 
intellect, even asa current of air disturbs the flame of a 
lamp. O potent saget explain to us the cause of all these 
mysteries. 

THE AUSPICIOUS VADARAYANI said:—The great sage 
Narada, hearing the words of the king, was very much pleas- 
ed; and addressing him, recounted the following piece of 
history, which was eagerly listened to, by the other members 
of the assembly. 

THE AuspPicious NARADA said :—O king} it is the igno- 
rance of Prakriti and Purusha, which hath assigned bodies 
to beings, to. enable them to discriminate between censure 
and eulogy, contempt and respect. O king! a sense of 
individuality in one’s own body generates in created beings, 
a sense of distinction, indexed by such terms as “I” “Mine” 
&c., as alsoenvy and suffering, springing from punishment 
and severity. Creatures die with the destruction of this body 
in which is encased this sense of individuality. But such 
is not the case with the Universal Soul, which hath got 
no individual distinction, for He is absolute; so none can 
attribute hostility or malice unto Him, in consequence of 
his inflicting punishment on inimical wights. Therefore, 
one ought to attach oneself, any how, to the Supreme Being, 


4. SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


either out of enmity, or friendship, fear or affection or 
desire ; but he should never be looked upon, as totally se- 
perate from ourselves, 

‘It is my firm belief, that mortals do not so easily attain 
an absorption in Him, by means of devoted attachment, as 
they do, by the bitterest enmity. The cockroach, shut up in 
a hole, by the large black bee, meditating intently on him 
through anger or fear, very soon attains his nature. Thus 
those people, who meditate on the great God Krishna, Who 
assumed human form through His illusive power, taking Him 
as their bitter adversary, very soon attain to Him, having, 
in the first instance, been purged of all their impiety. By 
reverentially concentrating their minds on Him, through fear, 
affection, love or hate, many have attained unto his mode 
of existence, after having been purified of all impiety 
springing out of these. O Lord! the Gopees have attained 
unto Him, through love, Kansa through fear, the king of 
Chedi; and others headed by him, through malice, the 
bai ee through consanguinity, you through affection, and 
(finally) we through devotion. But Vena did not meditate 
on tpe Purusha in any of these five ways. (Vena was cast 
into ell.) Therefore by some means or other, the mind 
ought to be fixed on Krishna. O son of Pandu! this Chaidya 
and Dantavakra, the sons of your mother’s sister, were 
formerly the two chief followers of Vishnu. They both 
were dismissed, in consequence of their having been cursed 
by a Vipra. 

THE AUSPICIOUS YUDHISTHIRA asked :—Who pronounced 
the curse, and what was its nature that it was able to over- 
power'even the servants of Hari? That even those worship- 
pers of Hari, who adored Him with a singleness of purpose, 
were compelled to be born, seems unworthy of belief. Thou 
ought to relate to us all, as to how they, the dwellers of, 
Vaikuntha and devoid of the material structure, senses and 
life, became possessed of bodies, 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 5 


THE AUSPICIOUS NARADA said :—One day Sananda and 
the other sons of Brahm, while traversing at their will the 
three worlds, arrived at the residence of Vishnu. These sons 
of Brahma, though born even before the “ancients” (Maricha 
and others), looked like boys five or six years old, and 
were stark naked. The gate-keepers (Shisupala and Danta- 
vakra) prevented them from entering, thinking them to be 
mere children. Exasperated (at this conduct) these sages 
cursed them thus :—“Ye do not deserve to dwell near the 
feet of Madhu’s enemy, devoid of the principles of energy 
and dullness. Therofore, O thoughtless creatures! do ye 
very soon enter the iniquitous existence of Asuras’. Then 
seeing these two accursed ‘beings fall headlong from their 
own sphere, the compassionate sages again spoke to them :— 
“After ye are born three times, you shall regain your 
places (in heaven).” Then these two were born as the two 
sons of Diti, and were honoured by both the Daityas and 
Danavas. Hiranayakagipu was killed by Hari, in the form 
of a lion; so also was Hiranakshya, when in the form of a 
boar, Hari was engaged: in lifting up the Earth. , This 
murderous Hiranyakagipu, invented various means of torture 
for effecting the death of his son Prahlada so greatly attach- 
ed to Keshava. But in spite of all his endeavours he could 
not compass the death of Prahlada, who identified himself 
with all creatures, who was passionless and impartial, and 
who was surcharged with the prowess of the Almighty Lord. 
Then they were again born in the Rakshasa species, as 
sons of Visravasu by Kesini, known under the names of 
Ravana and Kumvakarna, and became the tormentors of the 
three worlds. Here again the great Lord, born as a des- 
cendant of the Raghu race, slew them both, to release them 
from their curse. O Lord thou shalt hear about the prowess 
of Rama from the lips of Mackandaya. They. were then 
born as Kshatryas, being the sons of your mother’s sister. 
They were set free from this curse, on being killed by the 


6 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


discus of Krishna, abolishing their sins. These two follow- 
ers of Vishnu, intently meditating on him, out of the bitterest 
enmity, attained a nature similar to his own, and again 
reached his proximity, 
THE AUSPICIOUS YUDHISTHIRA said:—O mighty sage! 
explain the cause of his (Hiranyakacipu’s) hatred towards 
‘his beloved and high-souled son Prahlada; as also how 
Prahlada became‘ devoted, heart and soul, to the Lord that 
never lapseth. 


OF mame 


CHAPTER Ff. 


Te AUSPICIOUS NARADA said:—O king! when his 
brother had been thus slain by Hari in the form of a boar, 
Hitanyakagipu was greatly agitated with wrath and grief. 
Full of wrath and biting his lips, he said, with his eyes 
sparkling with rage looking at the sky, which seemed to be 
dim and hazy. Then with a face incapable of being looked 
at, on account of its frowning aspect and fierce look, as also 
on account of his terrible teeth, he lifting his trident, in 
the very midst of that assembly,thus addressed the Danavas: 

O Danavas and Daityas! you Dimurdhan, Trakhya, 
Samvara, Satavahu, Hayagriva, Namuchi, Paca, IIbala, 
Viprachiti, Puloman, Sakuni and others} first listen to what 
I say, and then do without delay what you think necessary. 
My best friend and beloved brother has been slaughtered 
by my puny adversaries, with whom Hari, though professing 
impartiality, has sided, attributing his. course to their 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 7 
devout worship of Him. I shall soothe, my sorrow, by offering 
oblations to my (departed) brother, so fond of it with the 
copious crimson fluid flowing from the trident-severed neck 
of that one, who has relinquished his own nature, who 
though pure, has assumed the form of a wild boar and 
whose mind is tickle like that of a child, and who is ever 
following his worshippers. When that wily adversary of 
mine is destroyed, the heaven-abiding gods having for their 
life Vishnu, will wither like the branches of a tree when 
its roots have been severed. At present, do you alf 
repair to the regions of the Earth, which has become 
filled with Brahmanas and Kshatryas; and there fall to 
slaughtering those, that aré engaged in sacrifices, religious 
penances, vows, Vedic recitation and acts of charity. For 
Vishnu is identified with the religious observances of the 
twice-born ones. That Lord himself is all sacrifice and is 
composed of righteousness ; he is the sole protector of the an- 
cestral spirits, celestial sages, created beings and righteous- 
ness. Repair to those regions and with fire and sword, 
devastate the places, where you shall find the twice-born 
ones, the sacred kine, the Vedas and the performance of 
religious ceremonies by the different sects in their respective 
mode of existence. 

Thus the Daityas, naturally fond of oppressing others, 
highly honoring with their (bent) heads, the command of 
their Lord, began to oppress creatures (as best they could). 
They set fire to towns, villages, parks, pleasure-gardens, 
corn-fields, ‘hermitages, mines, cow-pens, ‘houses of 
farmers and herdsmen, villages at the foot of mountains, and 
chief towns and capitals. Some broke bridges, walls and 
city-gates, with spades and other digging implements, whilst 
others, with axes in their hands, cut down trees used to 
afford livelihood (to people). Some, again, burned the houses 
of people with flaming torches. When the world was thus 
continually harassed by the followers of the king of Daityas, 


8 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


the gods, having left their heavenly abode, began to wander 
through the Earth invisibly. The aggrieved Hiranyakacipu 
having performed Katodaka* and .other ceremonies for 
the benefit of his dead brother, consoled the sons of the latter 
—whose names were—Sakuni, Samvara, Dristi, Bhutasantap- 
ana, Brika, Kalanava, Mahanava, Harisasmru and Utkacha, 
That Lord of the people, conversant with season and place, 
addressed them, their mother, his sister-in-law,—Vanu,—and 
his own mother Diti, and spoke in mild words as follows. 
THE AUSPICIOUS HIRANYAKACIPU said:—O mother! 
O Sister-in-law! O my sonst you ought not to lament my 
very brave brother. To die facing an enemy (in the field 
of battle) is the kind of death, which heroes are proud of, 
and which is much coveted by them., (To his sister-in- 
law) O thou great observer of vows! the sojourn of beings 
on this mundane sphere, is like the gathering of people in 
a Prapa, (a place where water is distributed). They are 
united together on account of their pristine deeds and are 
separated from each other in consequence of their own acts 
performed in this life. The soul is undeteriorating, eternal, 
pure, devoid of form, Omnipresent, and Omniscient ; creat- 
iag multifarious structures, by means of its own illusive 
energy, it assumes a body, (or as Bisvanatha explains—under- 
goes weal and woe). O gentle dame! as when the waters 
of a lake are disturbed, the trees, reflected on them, seem to 
move or as when the eyes roll, the earth appears to revolve, so 
when the mind is whirled about by the principles, the perfect 
Purusha (soul), though really devoid of any material, form 
deems himself as having it and becomes similar to it (mind). 
To be conscious of a form when there is none in reality, is 
the perversity of the soul; and is the cause of separation from, 
and meeting with, friends and foes respectively, as well as 
of our actions, and repeated births. It is also the cause of 


* The watery oblation offered to the spirit of the dead; Kata—a spirit, 
and udaka—water. 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 9 


our birth, death, various sorrows, ignorance, anxiety and 
oblivion of conscience. I shall recount to you an old 
fable illustrating this subject, in which is described the parley 
between Yama, and the friends of a dead man. Now hear me 
with attention. 

In Usinara there lived a king named Suyagna; when 
he was killed in battle by his enemies, his kinsmen re- 
pairing to the field of battle surrounded him on all sides. 
His armour, studded with precious gems, was shattered 
and all his garlands and garments had fallen off from his 
person. His chest was torn open with arrows, and he lay 
weltering in his own blood. His hair flew about loosely, 
his eyes were upturned, and his teeth remained biting 
his lips, even as he had done so, in his wrath; his lotus- 
face was covered ‘with dust (of the field of battle), 
and his weapons and two arms were sundered in battle. His 
queens, seeing their husband the king of Usinara, thus 
dealt with by Fate, were greatly aggrieved; and exclaming, 
O lord! we are undone, they repeatedly beat their breasts 
with their hands, and fell at his feet. Then these women, 
whose hair and ornaments were loosened, bathing the 
lotus-feet. of their dead lord, with tears tinted red with 
the saffron on their breasts, cried aloud for a while; then, 
producing sorrow in those present, they bewailed him 
saying :—“O lord! by the instrumentality of the heart- 
less Destiny, the cause of our present heavy grief, thou, 
the maintainer of the people of Usinara,hast been transported 
to a state of existence, beyond the range of our sight. 
O ruler of earth! how can we live without thee, our grate- 
ful and intimate friend? Therefore, O brave hero! permit 
us, who have always tended thy feet, to follow thee thither, 
where now, thou hast been carried.’ Thus when they 
were lamenting around their dead lord, unwilling to 
carry him to the cemetery, the sun set inthe sky. Then 
Yama, ‘hearing the lamentations of the friends of the 

2 


10 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


deceased, went to them, in the disguise of a boy, and thus 
spoke to them. 

THE AUSPICIOUS YAMA said:—Indeed it is astonishing 
to see the folly of these-elderly people, thoroughly acquaint- 
ed with the riatural laws obtaining on this earth. Them- 
selves mortals, they are uselessly lamenting him who has 
gone to Him, from Whom he had come. Surely we deserve 
greater praise, for though left here (in this world) alone, 
by our parents, we never allowed ourselves to be preyed 
upon by anxiety. Nor, though powerless, were we de- 
voured by lions and tigers, for He protected us, who had 
looked after. ourselves when we were inside (our mother’s) 
womb. O ladies! this world, composed of movable and immo- 
vable things, is a mere plaything (in the hands) of that un- 
deteriorating Lord of the universe,who creates, preserves and 
destroys it, at his will. He alone is capable of preserving and 
destroying it. Protected by Destiny, a man is preserved, even 
if abandoned on the road ; forsaken by it a man dies, even 
if he remain in his own abode. Even one helpless, can 
(safely) live in a wood, if he is looked after by Destiny, 
whilst the person, whose death is intended by it, dies even 
if he be carefully hidden and protected in his home. Corpo- 
real bodies, are made and destroyed, in consequence of the 
actions performed by the spiritual body. This is the uni- 
versal law. More-over, the soul, though located in Prakriti 
(here, body), does not inherit the properties of the latter, for 
it is totally different from the body. Even as his house 
composed of the elements, is distinct from the person owning 
the same, so this body forged by his ignorance, is different 
from the soul, Like things made out of the dtoms of water, 
earth or any metal, this body meets with destruction, when 
it is worn out with the lapse of time. Just as fire remaining 
latent in the fuel, is known to be different from it, as water 
conta ined inside our bodies differently manifests itself, and 
as the sky, present in everything, is not associated with the 


yj 
SRIMADBHAGABATAM. It 


same, so this soul, though residing in the Gunas (the body 
with the senses), is distinct from them. O ignorant creatures-T 
is not Suyagna, for whom you are lamenting, lying before 
you? But you do not behold him, who really listens to your 
- words and answers them (z.e., the soul). Even the great vital 
principle, which is said to be the chief among bodily organs 
and is furnished with the senses, has not the power; of listen- 
ing and replying to the words, save the soul, that is distinct 
from that principle and body. This lord (the soul) assumes 
various bodies, furnished with the mind and_ the 
senses, forming” the spiritual self; he also renounces, 
these bodies by means of his own energy. As long 
‘as the soul resides in the body, so fong the bonds 
of action hold sway over it; hence originate perversity 
followed by misery, and an entanglement in the worldly 
affections. To look upon, and speak of, the actions of the 
Gunas (our pleasures &c) as a reality, is indeed a false 
notion of the mind. Like our desires and dreams, the objects 
of perception are fanciful. Those who are acquainted with 
the nature of the Eternal, and the Transient, do not Jament 
for either of them; when some among these (beings) are 
seen to mourn, it is to be understogd, that nature rules 
supreme in them. | 7 
A fowler, created as the death of birds, spreading 
his springes in the woods, used to catch birds by means 
of baits, and other tempting things. One day 
he found a pair of Kulingas, pecking in tle woods: 
O queen! one of them,—the Kulingi, as if urged on by 
Fate, was suddenly tempted by the fowler, and caught in 
the chords of his net. The male Kulinga, seeing her greatly 
endangered, was much ‘aggrieved. He, pitiable being, over- 
powered by his affection for her, began to lament his miser- 
able wife thus :— 
‘O most cruel creator! what wilt thou do with my kind, 
though poor wife, who is (surely) lamenting for my miser- 


12 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


able self. Do thou also take me, O God! for what is the 
use of this poor half of my self that will have to live in 
great misery, on having been separated from his better-half ? 
How shall I maintain my unfledged, motherless young ones, 
who,—unfortunate as they are—are even now awaiting in . 
their nests, the arrival of their mother. 

Then as if impelled by fate the fowler having com- 
pletely hid himself, shot with his arrow, the male, Kulinga, 
whose voice was choked with the vapour of grief, and 
who, aggrieved for the death of his wife, was lamenting her 
hard by. So, foolish creatures, you do not see your own 
destruction! you cannot get your husband back even 
though you mourn, hundreds of years for him.’ 

THE AUSPICIOUS HIRANYAKACIPU said :—The astonished 
relatives of Suyagna,hearing the boy thus speak,thought every 
thing to be unreal and transient. Having related this tale, 
Yama, also, disappeared thence ; and the kinsmen of Suyagna, 
performed religious rites for the future benefit of his soul. 
Therefore do you not lament for your relatives or enemies. 
For, but for the ignorance of corporeal beings, the result of 
which is a differentiation between what is their own and 
what is not, who is your relative, and who is your enemy? 
And what is there that belongs to you, and what to others ? 

THE AuSPIC1IOUS NARADA said:—Thus Diti with her 
daughters-in-law, having heard the words of the lord of the 
Daityas, immediately giving up her grief for her son, applied 
her mind to a contemplation of the Divine Being. 


SRiMADBHAGABATAM. 13 


CHAPTER ILI 


‘le AUSPICIOUS NARADA continued :—O king ! Hiranyaka- 
gipu wanted to make himself, invincible, immortal, ever youth- 
ful, unrivalled and the sole ruler of the worlds. (With this view) 
he with his arms _up-lifted and eyes turned towards the sky, 
began to perform severe religious austerities, in the caves of 
the Mandéra mountains, standing on the tips of his toes. He, 
with the halo of his matted-locks, shone like -the sun with his 
rays, at the time of the universal annihilation. On his enter- 
ing upon his religious austerities, the celestials occupied 
‘their former abode. A smoky fire, the result of his religious 
austerities, emitting out of his head,and spreading in all direc- 
tions, began to burn the higher and the lower regions. The 
rivers and the oceans, the earth with her islands and moun- 
tains, were all greatly agitated. The planets with the stars, 
shot out from their respective places; and the ten quarters 
of the heavens, were illumined with fire. Thus, distressed 
by him, the gods quitted their heavenly abode, repaired to 
Brahmaloka, and thus addressed the Creator :— _ 

“O chief of the gods, O Lord of the universe! we are 
unable to reside in Heaven, being sorely afflicted with the 
religious austerities of the king of the Daityas. O Great one} 
if thou mind it, manage his pacification, before the Lokas, that 
pay tribute unto thee, are destroyed before thee. Hast thou 
not heard the resolve of that one, who is performing very 
severe religious austerities? If not, hear it as we recount 
itto thee: ‘As the great Parmesthi, having created this 
mobile and immobile universe by virtue of his rigid penances 
and Yoga, is now sitting supreme on his own throne, so 
will I ameliorate my condition, by strictly observing the 


14 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


ever-growing asceticism and Yoga; for Time and the Soul! 
are both eternal. Otherwise, I will, with my prowess, make 
the condition of this universe such, as it had never attained. 
What is the good of attaining to, Vaishnava and other states, 
which are wasted with the lapse of time at the end of a 
Kalpa' 

We have heard this determination of his; and with this 
object in view, he has had recourse to the perfotmance of 
religious austerities. Now, Lord of the three universe! do 
what thou thinkest meet. O Lord of the worlds! thy 
seat of Paramesthi is the origin the of twice-born race, kine, 
as well as, of all happiness, prosperity, good fortune, and 
victory.” 

O king! thus informed by the gods, the mighty self-origi- 
nated Being (Brahm4), surrounded by Vrigu, Daksha and 
others, went to the hermitage of the chief of the Daityas. At’ 
first he could not see him (Hiranyakacipu),for he was covered 
with ant-hills, grass, and reeds, whilst his skin, flesh, mar- 

row, and blood,were simultaneously being eaten into, by large 
‘number of ants. Aftera while Hansavéhana (Brahm) as- 
tonished on seeing him distress the worlds, with his religious 
austerities, like the sun hid under clouds, addressed him 
laughing. ; 

THE AUSPICIOUS BRAHMA said :—Arise, arise, O Kacyapa ys 
good betide you! you have succeeded in your austerities: [ 
have come to confer on you, any boon that you may ask, any 
boon that you may like. Ihave witnessed your marvellous 
patience; your life lingers only in your bones, for your body 
has been eaten up hy ants. Neither sages of yore ever 
performed, nor those of the future, will perform, such pe« 
nances. Who can preserve his life for a full hundred years 
without even drinking water? O son of Diti! indeed I 
am vanquished by your austere penances, as well as, by your 
perseverance which is hard to be practised even by the great 
sages. Therefore, O foremost of Asuras! 1 am willing to 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 15 


bestow all blessings on you; do not think that, mortal 
though you be, your interview with me, an immortal, wilt 
go for nothing. 

Te Auspicious NARADA said :—Thus speaking, the first- 
born God, sprinkled on him, staying with his body eaten up 
by ants, the’ pure water of his Kamandalu fraught with 
infallible prowess. Then like fire from fuel, he (Hiranya- 
kacgipu) came out of the reeds and ant-hills, young, with 
fresh energy and power, and all his limbs as hard as thunder, 
and also with the splendour of molten gold. He going 
into raptures at the sight of the God, and finding Him, 
seated on his swan, and stationed in the sky, saluted him by 
touching the ground with his head. Then arising, and look- ’ 
ing with intent eyes towards the Lord, with his hands joined 
and body stooping, he began to speak in thrilling accents, 
whilst tears rolled (down his cheek) and his hair stood on 
end from delight. 

HIRANYAKACIPU said :—Salutation to the great primary 
Being, who himself is Light ; who revealed by his own 
brightness this universe, which at the time of its destruction 
had been pervaded by blinding darkness ; who, supported 
by the Principles, creates, preserves,and destroys the worlds ; 
and who is the receptacle of Goodness, Energy and Dull- 
ness. Salutation unto the First Person the origin of the uni- 
verse, whose form is the knowledge of the scriptures and the 
sciences, and who attains manifestation by the actions of the 
vital principles, the mind, the senses, and the understanding. 
Thou governest the mobile and immobile universe, being 
theic principal essence: therefore thou art the Lord of the 
people. Thou art also the supreme Lord of the heart, cons- 
ciousness, mind, the sense-organs, as well as, of the ele- 
ments; and dost constitute their receptacle. Thou spreadest 
the Saptatantus,* by means of thy three forms (consisting 


rt 


* Different kinds of sacrifices. 


16 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


of the three Vedas) and the knowledge of Chaturhotraka® 
Thou art one and the soul of the living; thou hast no begin- 
ning and no end,in time or space; thou knowest our in- 
most thoughts, for thou art omniscient. Thou art the (eternal) 
Time, and being winkless, dost shorten the duration of life 
of living beings, by means of Lavat and other divisions of 
Time. Thou art the uniform soul, the supreme God; thou art 
great and unborn; and the vital essence of the living world. 
Out of thyself,spring causes and their consequences, the mobile 
and the immobile creations. There is nothing that is totally 
distinct from thee. All learning and Time, constitute thy body. 
Thou containest within your entrails, the golden mundane 
egg; and sittest on the back of nature, composed of the 
three Principles. Therefore thou art called the Great Brahma. 
O lord, verily, this visible universe is thy material body, by 
means of which, thou enjoyest the (pleasures of the) senses, 
mind, and life; but thy unrevealed self, the ancient Purusha 
resides in thy abode of* Paramesthi. O infinite Being! 
Salutation to thee, great one, who pervadest the whole 
universe with thy imperceptible self, and who possessest 
both learning and illusion. O excellent bestower of boons |! 
if thou be willing to bestow on me my cherished desire, 
then, O lord, let not my death come from any being of thy 
creation. Let ‘me not die indoors or out of doors; during: 
night or at day’ time by the hand of other beings (out of thy 
creation); by means of weapons; on earth or in the skies. Let 
me not bekilled by men, or animals, by animate or inanimate 
beings, by the celestials, Asuras or great reptiles. Grant me 
also matchless might in battle, undisputed lordship over cor- 
poreal beings, the glory of all the guardians of the world also: 
everything thou possessest, and all those undecaying luxuries, 
enjoyed by those, having asceticism as their source of power. 
* A religious rite, in the performance of which, four offerings of libations 


to the fire, are necessary. 
+ A minute divisicn of t'me, the sixtieth part of the twinkling of. an eye. 


SRiIMADBHAGABATAM. vy 


CHAPTER IV. 


r 

ie AUSPICIOUS NARADA said :—On being thus prayed 
to, Satadhriti (Brahm), pleased with his religious austeri- 
ties, conferred upon Hiranyakacipu those boons that are 
rarely obtained (by others). 

THE AUSPICIOUS BRAHMA said:—My son! the boons 
thou hast asked of me, are obtained by beings with difficulty ; 
yet, O chief of Daityas, although hard to attain, I bestow 
those boons on thee. 

Then the mighty lord whose mercy is always fruitful, 
went away from that place (Hiranyakacipu’s hermitage), 
worshipped by the chief of the Asuras, and praised by the 
lords of the people. . 

Thus the Daitya (Hiranyakagipu), having obtained the 
boons from Brahm&, assumed a golden body, and remem- 
bering the death of his brother, commenced hostilities against 
the Great One. That great hero, the conquerer of the worlds, 
having subjugated and brought under his sway the quarters of 
the heavens, the three worlds, celestials and Asuras, kings 
among men, Gandharvas, birds (eagles), reptiles, Siddhas, 
Charanas, Vidhyadharas, sages, lords of ancestral spirits, 
Manus, Yakshas, Rakshas, and lords of spectres, of goblins, 
of ghosts and of all other creatures, robbed the Lokapalas 
of their places by force. Then he established himself in 
Heaven, furnished with the beauty of the pleasure-gardens 
of the gods. There he took up his residence in the palace 
of Mahendra, which, built by Visvakarma himself and 
fraught with all luxuries, had been the abode of the queen. of 
the three worlds. There where the staircases were made 
ef coral, the pavement consisted of precious emeralds, the 

3 


18 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


walls of crystal, the rows of pillars of lapises; where 
the canopies were of wonderful workmanship, where the 
seats were adorned with rubies, the beddings, white like the 
foam of milk, were fringed with strings of pearls, where 
the goddesses with faultless teeth, filling their neighbour- 
hood with the tinklings of their bangles, used to see their 
beautiful faces (reflected) on the pavement which consisted 
of gems—there, in that palace of Mahendra revelled he 
(Hiranyakagipu), of terrific rule, possessed of great prowess 
and magnanimity, the vanquisher and the supreme sovereign 
of the worlds, having his two feet respectfully tended by 
the oppressed gods and others. O king! all the Lokapdlas, 
except the Three, (Brahma, Vishnu and Maheshwara), bear- 
ing presents in their hands, began to worship him, who was 
always intoxicated with strong-flavoured’ liquors, whose 
coppery eyes were always rolling, and who had become the 
reservoir of all Yoga prowess and energy. O Pandava} 
ourselves, Visvavasu, and Tamburu were compelled to 
ptaise him after he established himself on the throne of 
Mahendra, as also the Gandharvas, Siddhas, sages,: Vidy4- 
dharas, and Apsaras. He, worshipped with sacrifices, 
accompanied by Dakshinds, performed in the various modes 
of life adopted by the different orders, forcibly appropriated 
portions of the oblations. The world with its seven grand 
divisions, though not at all cultivated, yielded corn unto 
him. The kine bestowed his desires. And the sky became 
the scene of many marvels for him. The oceans and their 
wives, (with their beds teeming with gems), filled with 
brine, liquor distilled from molasses, clarified butter, honey, 
eurd, and nectar, bore him myriads of gems on. the crests of 
their waves. The mountains with their caverns were 
turned into his pleasure-gardens. Trees bore him flowers 
and fruits through all the seasons of the year. Single- 
handed, he assumed all the functions of the Guardians of the 
world.. 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 19 


him :—Thus having conquered the cardinal quaters of heaven, 
that sole monarch (of the universe) with passions rampant, was 
not satiated, though he enjoyed these desirable objects to his 
heart’s content. Long periods passed away during which he 
held sway, having the malediction of the Brahmanas hanging 
over his head, and from arrogance begot of prosperity, openly 
setting at naught the ordinances of the Shastras. All the 
worlds together with their protectors, were preyed upon by 
anxiety in consequence of his inflicting terrible punishments 
on them. Not obtaining refuge anywhere else, they sought 
it of Him who never lapseth. Salutations to that quarter of 
heaven, over which presides the All-soul and god-head 
Hari; to that quarter, entering which, pure and peaceful 
ascetics never return. For this reason it was, that the pure 
and self-controlled Lokapalas of composed intellects, fore- 
going sleep and living solely on air, began to pray unto 
Hrishikeca. After a few days, like the rumbling of clouds, 
completely filling all the quarters of heaven with its echo, 
there came from some unseen source to their ears, the 
following prediction, bringing with it assurances of safety 
for the pious. “Be not afraid, O ye foremost of the celes- 
tials! good betide ye all! For created beings, a sight of 
myself is the means of attaining to all prosperity. I have 
come to know the oppression of this vilest of Daityas. I 
will put an end toit. Do ye wait till the (meet) season. 
He meets a hasty destruction who reviles the celestials, 
the scriptures, the kine, the Vipras, the pious, and 
righteousness and myself. Though he (Hiranyakagipu) has 
been made powerful by boons, yet I will slay him when 
- he shall persecute his own son, the high-souled, peace- 
loving and foeless Prahlada.” 

THE AUSPICIOUS NARADA continued:—Thus spoken to 
by the preceptor of the worlds, the celestials, bowing 
down unto him, went away, having all their anxieties 
removed, and considering the Asuras already slain. 


20 ‘SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


[That lord of Daityas had four sons, whose equals were 
never born; of these Prahlada grew to be great, in conse- 
quence of his possessing very many excellent qualities. 
He became the worshipper of the Great One. Having 
(his) senses completely under control, gifted with‘ 
Brahmanya and a pure character, and always true to his 
promises, he, like their souls, was the beloved and the best 
friend of all created beings. Even as a servant to his 
master, he used to bow down to the feet of the venerable 
ones. He was kind towards the poor, even as a father 
is towards his children. He bore brotherly affection to- 
wards his equals, and considered his superiors nothing, 
less than divinities. (Although possessing learning, wealth, 
personal beauty, anda noble lineage, he was free from 
arrogance. In times of danger, his mind remained un- 
ruffled. As he’ saw everything in the light of unreality, he 
had no desire for the pleasurable objects, which -are seen 
or heard of. Always having his senses, life, body, and 
understanding, under his (thorough) control, and all his 
wishes self-satisfied allayed he,though an Asura by birtl, was 
free of the characteristics of the species. In him the attri- 
butes of the Great One were present, which are repeatedly 
extolled, by the wise. Even now, they are not separated from 
him, even as they are never separated from the Almighty 
Lord. O king! not to speak of men like thyself, leven his 
enemies cite him as an exemplary character|in assemblies 
where discourses about the pious go on. He possessed, 
innumerable qualities which defy description. I can only hint 
at his glory who by nature was attached to the Almighty 
Vasudeva. Even when a mere boy, he disregarded his play- 
things. (At times) his mind being totally. absorbed in Vasu- 
deva, resembled a thing inert. His soul completely occupied 
in the thought of Krishna, who constituted his only object 
of temptation, he would know nothing of this matter-of- 
fact world. Sitting, lying, wandering, eating, drinking, and 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. at 


speaking, he, identifying his own existence with Govinda’s, 
would not be conscious of these acts of his. His conscious- 
ness being sometimes agitated’ with the thought of 
Vaikuntha, he would weep. Sometimes he would laugh and 
sing aloud, full of joy in consequence of his meditating on 
Krishna. Sometimes again he would cry aloud, raising his 
neck; and at other times he would dance, banishing bashful- 
ness ; sometimes, filled with His thought and completely lost in 
' Him, he would imitate His deeds. Sometimes enraptured and 
content with a realisation of Him (in his soul), he would re- 
main silent; his eyes would be partially open on account of 
tears of joy flowing ‘down in consequence of his bearing 
unshaken love: towards Him. In consequenee of his 
attaining to the company of indigent sages, he used to serve, 
the lotus feet of the Diety of unsullied renown. Thus im- 
parting his own highest happiness to those poor people 
encompassed in evil company, he imparted quiescence unto 
their souls. O king! Hiranyaka¢ipu offered ill-treatment to 
such a son of his who was magnanimous, highly exalted, 
and a great devotee of the Great One. 

THE AUSPICIOUS YUDHISTHIRA said :—O divine sage 
of exccllent vows! I wish to know how the father perse- 
cuted his pire and pious son. Fathers affectionate towards 
their sons, only chide them for their instruction, when 
they are disobedient, not to speak of those (sons) who are 
obedient and pious like Prahlada, and like him consider their 
superiors as divinities. But fathers never persecute their 
sons as enemies. O Brahmana, O master! gratify our 
curiosity regarding the enmity of the father towards his 
son, which goaded the former to effect the latter’s death. 


CHAPTER V. 


Tes AUSPICIOUS NARADA went on :—The sage Kavya 
was elected into their priesthood by the Asuras. His two 
sons, Sanda and Amarka, lived near the residence of the 
king of Daityas. Prahlada, who was well-versed in polity, 
was sent unto them by the king. They both taught: him 
and the sons of other Asuras, lessons that ought to be. 
learnt. He listened to what his preceptors told him, and. 
could read like them.; but in his mind, he did not think it 
right to be tought lessons the dicta of which were false 
notions of friends and enemies. O Pandava! one day the 
sovereign of the Asuras, placing his son on his lap, asked 
him : “O son! tell me, what do you think to be the best.” 

THE AUSPICIOUS PRAHLADA said:—O foremost of 
Asuras {| for corporeal beings whose intellects are confused 
by false conceptions of ego and egoism, I think it best. 
to enter into the woods and there to seek refuge in Hari 
after having abandoned the black-hole of this abode which 
is the cause of their souls’ degradation. 

THE AuspPICiouSs NARADA said :—The Daitya, hearing 
these words of his son which were wrapped up in (the 
thoughts) of the hostile party, laughed (and said) :—Thus is 
the understanding of boys spoiled by the teachings of 
others. Let the twice-born ones so carefully protect the boy 
in the abode of his preceptors, that the disguised partisans 
of Vishnu may not vitiate his understanding. The priests 
calling near them Prahlada, who had been conveyed to their 
place, praised him in mild language and then sweetly asked, 


. 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 23 


“Q son, Prahlada! good betide yous speak what is true, 
and do not lie. Whence is this perversity of your intellect 
which is not perceptible in other boys? Is this perversity 
of your understanding due to others, or has it grown out 
of your own self? O delighter of your race! describe to us,. 
your preceptors, for we are desirous of hearing it. 

THE AUSPICIOUS PRAHLADA said :——Salutation unto the 
almighty Being, through the agency of whose illusive 
energy were formed false notions about friends and enemies,. 
and who is seen by beings whose understandings are be- 
fooled (by his illusive energy). The beastly understandings. 
of people which have learned to differentiate in this way,. 
namely, “He is distinct from me,’’ “I am other than he,. 
&c,”—and which are occupied with unreal objects, then only 
seek spiritual benefit when He becomes propitions unto 
them. By the foolish, this Supreme Soul is ascertained 
to be a friend as well as an enemy, as also one whose 
ways are. difficult of follow. Even Brahma and others, 
the reciters of the (sacred) Vedas, are stupified whem 
they betake themselves to His paths (by which he is to be: 
attained). This Being is making my understanding different. 
from yours. O Brahmanay like a piece of iron approaching 
of itself a magnet, my mind is travelling toward Chakrapani, 
and is differentiated from those of yours by Him. 

THE AUSPICIOUS NARADA continued :—The high-minded 
Prahlada, having thus spoken to the Brahmanas, paused. 
Thereat, greatly enraged, the miserable servant of the king, 
reprimanding him, thus spoke: “Whois there? Fetch us our 
cane; this boy is the cause of our ignominy. The fourth 
expedient (7 ¢. chastisement) has been asserted to be meet 
for this perverse boy, the vilest of hisrace. He has grown as 
a thorny plant in a forset of sandal, the trees of which 
consist of the Daityas. This urchin is exerting himself as 
a handle to the axe—which is none other than Vishnu himself 
«=that is to irradicate this sandal-forest.” 


24 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


Thus frightening. him by reproaches and various 
other means, he (Prahlada’s perceptor), instructed him in 
those scriptural texts which. establish by argument 
Tribarga. Then his preceptor, knowing him to be well- 
learned in the four expedients worthy of being mastered, 
led him, after he jhad béen anointed with perfumes and 
decorated with ornaments by his mother, to an interview with 
the lord of Daityas. The Asura greeted the boy fallen at 
his feet with benedictions, and enjoyed great felicity by 
embracing him for a while with his two arms. O Yudhisthira ! 
thereafter, placing the Jad on his lap and smelling his head, 
he bathed him with tears; and then witha blooming counte- 
nance thus spoke :—“O my son, Prahlada, may you live long! 
Tell me some of the best lessons that you have. read, and 
learnt from your preceptor during this long period. 

THE AUSPICIOUS PRAHLADA said:—To my mind that 
is the best of all teachings, which prompts beings to actions 
when they have offered to the Almighty Vishnu, all their 
reverence bearing these nine features, namely, hearing of 
Vishnu, recitial of him, remembering him, tending of his 
feet, worshipping, adoring, serving and befriending him, 
and self-abnigation (for his sake.) 

Hearing these words of his son, with his lips quivering 
in anger Hiranyakagipu then thus spoke to the son of 
his Preceptor: O meanest of Brahmanas! what does this 
mean} O evil-minded one! the boy has been taught rubbish 
by you who neglecting myself have sided with mine enemy, 
In this world there are impious people hidden under the 
guise of feigned friendship. In time, ike maladies of the 
sinful, their evil doings become manifest. 

THE AUSPICIOUS SON OF THE PRECEPTOR said :—O 
enemy of Indra! what your son says, is neither taught by 
me nor by others; this notion is natural with him. “O 
kingt renounce your anger; do not lay the blame on our- 
‘selves.” Thus replied to by the preceptor, the Asura again 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 25 


Spoke to his son :—O ill-behaved one! if your perverse 
inclination is not due to the teachings of your preceptor, 
whence is it then ? 


THE AuSPICIOUS PRAHLADA said :—The understanding 
of those who are attached to their homes, and who on 
account of their unsatiated senses are repeatedly entering 
this gloomy earth where they ruminate over their old experi- 
‘ences, is never accomplished in the adoration of Krishna 
either through their own exertions or through those of their 
preceptors or of other people. Persons of vitiated desires ac- 
cepting those who are absorbed in outward objects as_their 
preceptors, s, do not Tealise Vishnu who is revealed only unto 
those who 3 are conscious of Purushartha in themselves. Like 
a blind man fallen in a pit, led by another blind man, they 
become entangled in the threads of the spacious snare 
spread by the Lord. Until they obtain a sprinkling of dust 
from the feet of the great sages, ‘free from desires, the ‘under- 
standings of these men that aim at emancipation from the mis- 
fortune- of repeated births in this world, can not attain to 
the feét of Urukrama (Vishnu). 


Thus ‘speaking, his son paused, whom Hiranyakacipu 
blinded with wrath, threw off on the ground from his lap. 
Then possessed by violent wrath, and with his eyes render- 
ed slightly red, he (Hiranyakagipu) thus spoke. 


“QO Nairitas! this (boy) ought to be killed; so slay him 
without delay; drive him away immediately. (Certainly) 
this boy ought to be reckoned as the slayer of «my brother ; 
for this wretch, renouncing his own friends, is worshipping 
like a servant the feet of Vishnu, the murderer of his uncle. 
On the other hand, what good shall be done unto Vishnu by 
this impious and faithless one who at the age of ‘five years 
has sundered the chord of paternal, affection that is hard to 
break. Even a stranger, doing good unto us like a medicine, 
should be considered as our own child. On tke other 

4 


26 SRIMADBHAGABATALL. 


hand sons, begotten by us, when doing evil unio us, should 
be considered as diseases; (even) one, of our limbs that 
has become a source. of misery, ought to be severed, so 
that by its renunciation the rest may live in felicity. Like 
uncontrolled senses inimical to an ascetic, ‘this adversary 
of mine, disguised in the garb of a friend, ought to be 
slain by various means such as “ poisoning his food,’” 
“slaying him when sitting unguardedly, or when asleep.” Thus | 
commanded by their lord, the Nairitas, bearing tridents in 
their hands and having sharp teeth, frightful faces, and 
copper-coloured beards and haiy, emitted terrific shouts 
crying out at the same time “slay slay.” They then began 
to wound with their tridents the seated Prahlada in his 
' vital parts. Like the efforts of a man, devoid of (previous) 
religious merit, for performing good acts, their strokes were 
unavailing against him who was then in communion with the 
highest Divinity, the Brahman, whose semblance is incom- 
prehensible and who is almighty, and fhe essence of all. O 
Yudhisthira! the lord’ of the Daityas seeing their endeavours 
(to kill him) thwarted, became very much afraid and in 
earnest began to think of various other expedients. When 
the Asura could not slay his sinless son by means of huge 
snakes, and elephants the guardians of the heavenly quarters, 
by employing magical spell, by throwing him down from 
mountain-peaks, by his illusive energy, by confinement, by 
poisoning, by starvation, by exposing him to (the inclemency 
of) fire, water, air or frost, by leaving him' alone on the 
mountains, and by various other means, as also through his 
personal agency, then did a continued anxiety take hold of 
him. (He thought within himself) :-— 

“[ have uttered very many abuses against him, and have 
employed “very many expedients to bring about his death, 
but he has saved himself by means of his own energy, from 
all those persecutions and mischiefs. This lad, though re- 
mhinin g at a short distance from me, is not at all daunted 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


te 
Ne 


in his mind. Like Suxasefa he does not forget my enmity 
towards him. This one is immortal, is of immeasurable 
prowess, and is not afraid of any thing. I know not Jif 
my death will result from a quarrel with him.!’? Sanda and 
Amarka, the sons of Usanas, in secret thus spoke unto 
him whose countenance was cast down on account of his 
anxiety and who was faded in his aspect :—‘Terrifying all the 
rulers of the cardinal quarters with a contraction of thy 
brows, single-handed thou hast conquered the three worlds. 
O Master! we do not descry the object of your anxiety. 
Indeed the behaviour of boys ought not to be discriminated 
as good or bad. Until thy preceptor Vargava comes, keep 
him bound with the noose belonging to Varuna, so that being 
frightened he may not Ay. For with age and by serving the 
superiors, a man’s understanding becomes ripened.” 

Then saying ‘yea’ unto the words of his preceptor’s 
sons, he thus spoke to them: “ He ought to be instructed by 
you in the religious practices of kings who have married and 
settled down’’,, O king! in regular order they began to teach 
the modest and diffident Prahlada in righteousness, and in the 
means for the realisation of wealth and desires. But though he 
was instructed by his preceptors regarding the three objects 
of worldly existence, yet he did not consider these teachings 
to be at all worthy, inculcated as they had been by people 
indulging in envy and anger. After a while when the 
preceptors were called to their home for the performance 
of household duties, Prahlada was invited by boys of 
the same age with him, in their leisure. The very wise 
Prahlada welcothed them with sweet words; and knowing 
their attachment to the objects of this earth, he out of kind- 
ness smilingly spoke to them. ' O foremost of kings! 
all these boys, whose understandings were not vitiated either 
by the teachings or by the exertions of those who delight in 
dispute (Brahmanas), left behind their playthings to do 
honour th Prahlada. They began‘to worship him, fixing 


28 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


their eyes and hearts on him. The friendly and kind-hearted 
Asura, the great devotee, thus spoke to them. 


OO: 


CHAPTER VI. 


e 

Ts AUSPICIOUS PRAHLADA said:—In this world the 
wise should practise- from their early years the true reli- 
gion inculcated by the Almighty Lord, as human exist 
ence which affords what we want, is very seldon attained 
to, and is also encompassed with uncertainty. In this 
existence it is proper to approach the feet of the Puru- 
sha Vishnu, who is beloved of all beings and who is their 
friend, soul and lord. O Daityas! on account of their being. 
possessed of bodies, like misery, the pleasures pertaining to 
the senses of corporeal beings, are everywhere (in various 
existences) obtained by them without the least effort, and 
through the agency of Destiny. One should not endeavour to 
get them (sensual pleasures), for, such useless endeavour 
diminishes the term of his life. Nor can one attain by that 
means to such happiness as is reaped from an worship of the 
lotus-like feet of Mukunda (Krishna). Therefore, being born 
in this world, the intelligent ought to strive for their own 
beneht, so long as their bodies, the emblems of the Purusha 
continue to be healthy and are not rendered incapable. The 
duration of a man’s life is hundred years (only); half of 
this period is allotted to him whose senses are not subdued; 
for at night absorbed in blinding darkness (refering to sen- 
sual enjoyments) he lies in idjeness, Twenty of these years 
of existence are spent in play, during which time he is fas- 
cinated by (the charms of) childhood and youth.” Another 


WORKS BY 
DINSHAH ARDESHIR T YARKHAN, 


Late Secretary to the Crier RajasTHANt Ha-of the Chiefs of Kattywar, an 
now the State Municipal Commissione His Hicuness THE Guicwar’s 


GOVERNMENT. 


The Author has a few copies of his following works for sale :-— 

Travels in Southern India; Review of the Parsi Social Question of 1870; Review o 
the Bombay Taxation Discussion of 1871 ; Review of Baroda Affairs in 1871 ; Criticisms, 
of Indian Fournals on the works on Baroda Affairs ; The Political Situation in Baroda; 
The Impending Revolution at Baroda, 1873-74; The Riots of 1874, their true History 
and Philosophy ; .British Policy respecting Famines in India; The Revolution at 
Baroda, 1874-75; Representation to His Excellency Sir P. E. Wodehouse, KC.B., 
Governor of Bombay, on Native States in Kattywar; The Forces of the Native States of 
India, considered in relation to the Defence of the Indian Empire; Letterson Afghan 
Affairs in 1880; Native Princes’ Own Book printed but subject to revision and 
additions. 

The Author now desires to publish Selections from his writings mainly on 
Provincial, Imperial, Social and Religious Questions, which have appeared and have 
been written between 1860 and 1884, with a view to give them a wider publicity, 
provided that sufficient subscribers are forthcoming. ‘The Selections will probably 
occupy about six volumes of the same size as Sir Richard Temple’s Work on “India 
in 1880," and may be consecutively published as the means secured for the purposy 
may permit. 

These writings have been conterminous with the increasing efficacy and consolidation 
of the Queen-Empress’ Government and the increasing integrity and honor of Native 
States in India, as much as with the gradual reform, originality, moderation, precision 
and activity of modern thought in India. : 


ea in See 
(3) How TO INTRODUCE f& . 


NATIONAL TECHNICAL EDUCATION IN INDIAN 
A REPRESENTATION 


TO 
HIS EXCELLENCY THE RIGHT HONOURABLE 


@ LORD REAY, LL.D, GLE, @ 


GOVERNOR AND PRESIDENT IN COUNCIL OF BOMBAY 
Price Annas 12, with Postage 


Will be published carly this year 


Selections from my Recent Notes on the Indian Empire, 
1884—85, 500 pp., 8vo 
Price Rs. 5; by Post Rs, 6 , 


B- 7 
The Educational Manifesto of Lord Dufferin 
at Allahabad. 


Pere Kor 


A sHort time ago the accomplished Viceroy of India, accepting the request 
of Sir Alfred Lyall, Lieutenant-Governor in the North-West, unveiled 
the statue of Sir William Muir, and declared the College building open 
in which that statue was erected, and which was founded by Sir William 
when Governor in those Provinces, The Hon’ble Mr. Justice Terrcll 
read an interesting address in which the origin of the institution was 
explained; 


We natives ought to take the fact as remarkable that, though the 
Allahabad College is mostly the product of the generosity of Native Chiefs 
and Noblémen, the moral impetus by which this beautiful, imposing and 
highly costly building has been raised is entirely due co European pluck 
and initiation, The fact is not remarkable in this light, that the national 
and absolutely evidential instruction of the Indian masses is entirely 
due to British, But we wish the fact to be striking to us in this 
wise: that grand institution is not solely the creation of native gentry 
and native nobility. The prime cause of the institution is Exgéish, and 
itis English gentlemen who have led the native promoters to the accom- 
plishment of this work, We must take this fact to heart in a spirit of 
very active emulation. We should like to see our own people and our 
own gentry initiating various educational measures for India, now that 
the author of How to Introduce National Technical Education into India has 
placed a broad, comprehensive and original design before the country, The 
national conviction is now complete, or is being completed, that technical 
education should be as wide-spread as the canal, railway, road or postal 
systema of the country: every town, district, or village maintaining 
technical, industrial and professional institutions, beautifully and carefully 
blended with graduated general cducation, The Hon’ble Mr, Peile, in 


32 


his last able speech at one of the educational institutions at Bombay, has 
maintained this view in the new and broad directions now perccived, 
and we have reasons tn believe that His Excellency Lord Reay is deli- 
berating upon some policy—not a hand and mouth affair surely. The 
speeches which we have now great pleasure to review as delivered by Sir 
Alfred Lyall and Lord Dufferin, fight in us such hopes as we sincerely 
desire to see realized in the regimé of these and other Indian 
statesmen who have ventured to question the present rigidity and 
disgusting opaqueness and sameness of the national system of our education, 
We know that the author of the pamphlet has reccived expressions from 
many influential quarters which go a great way in clothing the first 
visionary design with promising substance and abiding color, 


But to return tothe point we desire to bring home to the educated 
and aristoeratic classes of the country: come forward voluntarily your- 
sclves, and open the fountaim-source of your sympathies, wealth and 
influence in the cause of creating national trades and industries, We can 
only be much amused at the cavilling of many writers in the Press at the 
attitude of the Indian authorities towards higher and particular systems of 
national education, Our heart is full both for higher and every other 
education, But while the gencral cry is decidedly want of employment, 
and the woful absence of trades and arts, don’t seck to swamp it by cry- 
ing out that Government intends placing its foot upon higher education, 
It will do nothing of the kind; it can never do it even if it wished it. 
The highest and the broadest and the brightest prospects of academica} 
sciences and literature havo been most commendably and most un- 
reservedly placed before us by the voluntary efforts of this very Govern- 
ment, and we cannot help being amused at the ill-thought fears so widely 
expressed by our brethren, What we all have to do now is to incite 
monicd and cultured mento enlarge the foundations and superstructure 
of the educational and instructional edifice of Native India. Let British 
statesmen tell us frankly all the unsavoury truths which they may have 
to say on this question, The writer of the pamphlet has not heard 
from all sides, what would only apparently be congenial to his hopes and 
feelings ; but the following communication from a very influential 
Administrator in the Foreign Department, well known for his high 
practical ability and experience, may well induce us to think that we 


33 


should not lag behird in endeavouting carnestly ‘to realize the spirit 
with which some of our illustrious correspondents are animated ; we are 
sure our readers will fully see between the lines — 


“T desire to acknowledge, with sincere thanks, your pamphict on the introduction of national 
‘technical education into India, : 


“J am satisfied that in technical instruction and’ the consequent development of the 
industrial arts, industries and professions, lics the best hope for the future for educated Indians, 
who now look to Government to find them employment and who must be largely disappointed, 
owing to the excess of the supply over the demand, 


“ [think that your attracting attention to this subject may be of great advantage to your 
‘countrymen, the more-especially as it is to them that we must look for the provision of the 
higher ‘educational machinery. The princes, gentry and wealthy merchants of Bombay and 
Calcutta should come forward and endow institutions for technical instruction. The Govern- 
ment cannot be expected, in a country like India, to supply other than a modest share of the 
educational acquirements of the country, ; 

“T often, in native papers, see comparisons drawn between the proportional amount spent on 
education from the revenues of England and India, but the writers forget that India is in so 
low a phase of development and is so unprovided with the raw material of civilization, that 
the Government cannot afford to spend its money on educational luxuries. It can indeed do 
little more than offer elementary instruction to those too poor to obtain it themselves ; the 
test must be done by the native community itself. 100 or g¢0 years hence, when India has 
been supplied with the ordinary paraphernalia of civilization, in railways, roads, canals and 
public buildings, the Government may be able to find spare money for higher technical 
‘education, Till then Hindus must be content to put their ridiculous caste prejudices in their 
pocket and obtain technical training in England. Japan is twice as far from England as India, 
yet numerous Japanese are to be found in London and Paris, preparing themselves by a tech- 
mical training, for useful employment in their native country, and if Hindus are to gain a high 
place in the modern industrial world, they must act in a similar manner.” 

We may venture to say to this eminent Politician that, acknowledging 
as we do with no common regrct, that the Hindus should lack the very 
spirit which would renovate their physique, their homes and their mental 
and moral condition, we cannot possibly ignore the fact which nothing 
can displace, that in respect of technical education, as in regard to other 
public improvements already established in India, the Paramount Power 
must first come tothe rescue of the nations of India which have been 
rendered invalid under forcign treatment. The Government has to play 
the part of an incendiary—in such instances such exceedingly welcome 
incendiaries—and then the rest will surely follow. In spite of this 
our conviction, we are ashamed to sce our countrymen not buckling up 


34 


‘ 


in forcing the ziats to ridicule the really “ ridiculous prejudices” which 
have made them cowards and nonentities, Look ye countrymen to this 
dismal fact : it is the existence of these your prejudices which prompts 
this distinguished writer to believe, that India is still to take a hundred 
or two hundred years, even to complete the first preliminaries of its 
civilization! Such encouraging prospects really ! 


But to come to our notice of the speeches at Allahabad. No one could 
deny the gratification expressed by the Licutenant-Governor in being 
able to be present at the opening of the College, when, as he said, it is 
remembered how changes are constant and official vicissitudes many in 
India, In asking the Viceroy to declare the College—the foundation- 
stone of which was laid by Lord Northbrook—open, Sir Alfred did indeed 
allude to what was due to the extension of higher education, and in a 
manner which must disabuse the public mind of the unfounded misgivings 
entertained :— 

“T hope your Lordship will be pleased to accede to the request of our Committee, and to do 
us the honour of opening a building that is, I think, remarkable for its character and design, 
and that is in a high degree interesting to us in these Provinces, not only for what it 
commemorates, but also for what it may seem to promise, and, so to speak, to foreshadow. 
The building commemorates, my Lord, the liberality and public spirit of those who 80 freely 
contributed to the original fund, and who spared no pains to promote the work. It also 
commemorates the firm, earnest, and statesman-like trust placed by Sir William Muir and 
other leading personages—the principal Chiefs and the most enlightened representatives of 
different classes in our society—the trust placed by them in the sure and certain progress and 
spread of higher education in this part of India ; their belief in its great public advantage, and 
in its promise and potency of future development.” 

If Sir Alfred has but expressed the policy of the British Government 
in the eloquent and decisive language that he has employed, the entire 
mistonstruction placed upon the intents of Lord Dufferin becomes self- 
evident. We cannot help maintaining that Sir Lyall has done nothing 
elsc but expressed the views of the Government of India itself. But the 
highly sagacious and learned Lieutenant-Governor emphasises this policy 
by endeavouring to enter into the decpest depth of this earnestness, and it 
must become at once a pleasure and privilege to be acquainted with his 
lucid and glowing views on the question :-— 

“ And if we may pretend to reach a meaning in the style and proportion, and design of the 
architecture of this College, we may say that it foreshadows and anticipates the speedy expansion 
of high education under the combined impulses of Eastern and Western ideas and traditions, anit 


35 


ia) 
the advancement of learning toa greater dignity and more imposing position among us, Now that ° 
we have taken to erecting for our students a halt like this in which we are assembled, with cool 
colonades, domes ani towers, spacious lecture-rooms and librariés,,we have set up an outward 
visible sign of the spirit in which our gencration regards education, We are giving expression, not 
only to the modern principle that we are all bound to aid, publicly and privately, in throwing 
open the gates of the Temple of Knowledge, but also to the much more ancient fecling that 
architecture may play a great part in education, and that knowledge, like other powerful 
influences, should have a fitting seat and sanctuary. My Lord, 1 have spoken of this building as , 
complete, anid so it is im the sense that the plan of the architect, so far as we have it in 
detail, has been entirely catried out, and that the College fulfils our present need and purpose, 
Nevertheless the plan provides for future extensions and larger accommodation hercafter. And, 
as with the building, so with the institution and the cducational design, we look forward to 
a larger development, and our ulterior views go beyond the establishment of a Central College.” 


We may fairly presume with the author of the treatise on technical 
education, that the real proportions and magnitude of national cducation in 
India are now being clearly perceived. Sir Alfred se well walks close 
tothe author’s path which he thinks has been laid out through forests 
from end to end, that it would be agrecable to him to quote the identical 
passage from his tract. In submitting the tract to His Exccllency Lord 
Reay, he thus argues in his dedicatory note :-— 


“The most stringent necessity, in my opinion, exists to break up the present single and 
monotonous course of education, commencing with the primary and ending with the final 
University course, Having demonstrated in the following paper how the national educational 
edifice is a plain, huge, and sparsely sympathetic block, that edifice should be entirely 
reconstructed with a thousand varieties in its design which stili may present one useful and 
fiarmonious whole, The edifice now resembles in expression very much like the few primary 
words which were employed by the primzval nations of the ancient world., When the edifice 
is rebuilt, it would have the same expression as the present expansion and fruitfulness of the 
earliest language, 

* * * * 

“ As earth, brick, cement, stone, and various metals are more or less necessary in raising 
the several portions of a perfect, elaborate, architectural and artistic building, so the various 
stages of education, instruction and culture should be allied with the teachings of well-sifted, 
well-graded, and gradually swelling primary, literary, religious, and general clements of human 
knowledge and experience. Can any one, my Lord, pick out from the present chaos and debris 
of the educational institutions of the country, the simpic foundation, the plinth, the columns, the 
body-walls, the wallsplates, the tic-beams, the rcofs, even the main openings for air and ventila- 
tion, the prominent facade, or the rear presentment, the crowning, the relieving, or the subser- 
vient decorations, or, still further, the leading and the dependant objects of the said structure ? 
If any of these parts, elements, and characteristics of a structural body can, in this instance, be 
procured, my Lord, 1 may confidently leave your Excellency to consider if they arc all that is 


: 36 , 
G 
ordinarily wanted ; and, if it be so, whether they are located in the places and the positions they 
ought to be, Ifone were to place himself in the position of an intelligent child, he must at 
once be cross with the parents who have placed the parts and fittings of his toys in helpless 
confusion, and removed many’ of their integral portions and jointures altogether out of his 
teach and vision,” , 

Sir Alfred Lyall has shown the educational edifice in a more hopeful 
and re-assuring manner, and the simile of building, architecture and 
design, His Honor—it would be superfluous to say~—has becn able to put 
much more neatly and eloquently than ourselves, 

The next speech was, of course, the Viceroy’s, His Lordship is now 
widely known throughout India as a very agreeable speaker, soothing with 
plenty of honied words all those who go to him with requests or expecta- 
tions, It is dificult to say why a statesman wiclding great functions 
should not study to please his subjects: if he has little to give them he 
can at least soothe them with pleasing diction, and encourage them by 
generous counsel, But it is not likely that this policy, however essential 
ic is, no doubt, to pursuc it, will go long to inspire abiding confidence in 
the people. The public will some day have to admit that Lord Dufferin’s 
carecr has been earnest ; that he has secured for India great and permanent 
advantages which a stern and uncrring foresight alone could have secured : 
whatever the present unpopularity of his measures, And in this same 
manner is the Earl expected to establish an entirely renovated educational 
policy, He may not be able to carry it out in its entirety, but that the 
fall groundwork may be preparcd during His Exccllency’s regimé, all 
those who wish his rule well and are anxious for the removal of 
the gross dangers existing in the way of India’s prosperity may well 
desire, 

The Viceroy opened.his speech by a scrics of well-turned and sonorous 
sentenccs, in which he discharged his high privilege of passing eulogiam 
on those who helped to found the institution :— 

“This vast and noble structure, so graceful in outline, so rich in ornamentation, and so 
happily combining the spirit of the purest style of Oriental architecture with the requirement 
of modern utility, is as striking a proof of Sir William Muir’s triumphant exertions in the 
cause which he had so much at heart as it is destined to prove an enduring monument of his 
fame and name; and glad am I to think that his gallant son should be present here to-day to 
witness the honest and enthusiastic manner in which all of us now assembled beneath this 
toof desire to acknowledge his distinguished father’s merits, Nor in honouring him, who 
was tbe author of the enterprise, must we forget what is due to those public-spirited and 


37 

patriotic princes, nobles, and gentlemen, who by their personal exertions, as by the exhibition of 
a liberality which seems inexhaustible in India when any really good work has been set on 
foot, have enabled the original idea of the founder of your Collex: to be translated into solid 
stone and a substantial existence. The great tower rising above us appropriately comme- 
morates the name of the late Maharaja of Vizianagram, who, I am told, by a single stroke of 
the pen, gifted the Execptive Committee with no less than a lakh of rupees, In the same 
generous manner the Nawab of Rampur, himself an author, a poet, and a scholar, together 
with a Jarge number of other noblemen and gentlemen, contributed to the building fund of the 
college ; and I now seize the opportunity of assuring them that their conduct on the occasion 
has not failed of due appreciation at the hands of the Government, as well as of all their 
fellow-subjects, whether European or Indian.” 

Such a sincere Viceregal tribute as the above will, no doubt, stimulate 
the generous and useful sentiments of the Indian aristocracy of wealth and 
intelligence, as it well should, 

We feel thankful that his Lordship gave some indication of his 

educational policy, though in the absence of a thorough study of the 

whole question he desired only to subordinate his remarks to the learned 
utterances of the Licutenant-Governor, whom he so aptly described as 
* one of the most refined and distinguished scholars of the day.” The 
Earl thus set forth the objects of the Government in imparting education 
to the Indians :— ¥ 

“T will therefore content myself with briefly observing that the education of a people ought to 
produce three results, It should make them better, wiser, and richer than ever they were before. 
For the accomplishment of the first we must rely on the study of moral philosophy and of the 
Divine order of the world ; for the second, on a comprehensive acquaintance with general 
literature ; and for the third, on the prosecution of the arts and sciences, and more especially 
on a wide and extensive diffusion amongst all classes of a technical education, To such an 
audience as that which I see around me I do not think there is any need for my making any 
special recommendation of the first of these two branches ; but with regard to the third the case 
is somewhat different, and a few words may perhaps be said on it with advantage,” 

His Lordship narrated from his expericnce derived from his visits to 
schools and colleges, that the general desire among the students was to 
seck Government service after their curriculum was completed ; and His 
Excellency gave an interesting cxample to illustrate his own former 
impressions on the subject, He then proceeded to point out the evil and 
its remedy :— 

“ But, as Mr. Grant Duff has most justly observed in his remarkable address, and as must be 
obvious to every one, even supposing that the doors of the Civil Service were opened ever so 
wide to our young Indian aspirants, only a tithe of the class to whom I am referring could be 
so absorbed, The promising young student Isaw at Benares represented at the most the 


38 


outturn of a single year of only one of many similar establishments ; but the manufacture of 
similar claimants for Government employment, the great majority of whom must of necessity 
be doomed to disappointment .Mid discomfiture, is going on at hundreds of other seats of learning 
all over the country. Would“it not then be more useful tothe nation, as well as better for 
themselves, if other and more independent walks of life were opened upto them? To a consi- 
derable number the Bar, and what are knownas the liberal professions, will oferan honourable 
alternative, but even to these the avenues are already sufficiently crowded and their present 
variety is extremely limited. But as the Governor of Madras has pointed out, there are a great 
number of other careers which in Europe are thought eminently worthy to: be followed by 
gentlemen of birth and breeding, but which can scarcely be said to exist im India, principally for 
the reason that they require a previous technical education for their successful and remunerative 
pursuit, It is to supply this want that the exertions of the Government and the attention of 
the community at large should be principally directed. The co-operation of both is equally. 
necessary 3 and, so far as I am personally concerned, I need only say that nothing would give 
me greater pleasure than to be instrumental in extending and enlarging the scope of our 
educational efforts in the special direction to which I have referred.” 

The observations of the Governor-General, as far as they go, are right 
enough, and indced indicate the wide area to which technical instruction 
should be applied in India, We quite admit that this is-a question in which 
the co-operation of the community will also be desirable, We fear, 
however, that the Earl of Dufferin is not yet prepared to grasp the 
question with that vigorous line of policy in which he is unsurpassable— 
whenever he perceives the whole truth and is determined to act upon it 
with his whole heart and soul, Can we, a humble public writer, who has 
devoted a quarter of a century to the reform of Indian affairs, venture to tell 
the Earl that, however solid his administrative work in India promises to 
be, his Lordship will fail in securing any permanent and adequate popula- 
rity unless, before his return to England, he'so turns his promised attention 
to the question that every district may secure a budget estimate of its 
varied educational and instructional wants, on the scientific and com- 
prehensive method already laid before the public. This alone will not be 
sufficient, For, we do hope that the Viceroy may be gble to arrange to 
scnd hundreds of students to study the practical crafts and professions 
which may be selected from a mass of them as being the most principal 
ones, and to introduce the leading European technological agencies into 
the country, both to construct the practical classes and investigate the 
material resources abounding in India with a view to collect raw materials 
for the establishment of .popular arts and industries, It would be most 
deplorable if ever the question of funds were raiscd in this great cause of 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 39 


Enjoining him in the above manner, Garga repaired to his 
own abode. Nanda was greatly enraptured and considered 
himself crowned with all blessings. 

O sont in the course of time, Réma and Kesava in 
Gokula, began to crawl placing the weight of their body 

a their hands and their knees. They crawled on the muddy 
astures of Vraja, dragging their little feet and making a 
leasing tinkle by their zones and bangles. Delighted by 
hearing these sounds, they would sometimes follow men for 
a little distance.’ Then as if terrified and bewildered they 
would hastily come back to their mothers. The mothers, 
distilling milk out of affection, would then cmbrace their 
sons—looking beautiful being covered with mud—with their 
arms, and enjoy felicity by giving them suck and gazing at 

ioe countenances beautified with little teeth and charming 
smiles, When their childish sports were such as ¢ 

worthy of being seen by females, then they used 
hold of the tails of calves that dragged them hy 
thither on the pasture. The damsdls of Vraja stood [cing 
at them thus dragged, forgettihg their household duties, 
and they laughed and were delighted. Tosave their playful 


sons from horned animals, froyn fire, from animals having 
sharp teeth and tusks, from jserpents, from water, from 
birds and from thorns &c., als well as to look after their 
household duties, the mother$ of those boys were unable. 
-They were attacked with a greqt distraction of mind. 

O foremost of kings! within ashort time, Krishna and 
Réma, giving up crawling n their knees, began to walk 
swiftly on their feet in Vraj@ Then the almighty Krzshna 
accompanied by Réma, began to sport with other boys, of 
raja, of the same age With him, thus enhancing the joys 
the women of Vraja. he wives of the cow-herds seeing 
tiful boyish pranks of Kréshza,repairing to his mother 


ring. “ Krishnd& untethers the calves untimely. 
out of angerf\says anything unto him, he 


N 


\ 


40 SRIMADBHAGABATAM, 


laughs out. Inventing: novel means -of pilfering, he steals 
and drinks tasteful curd and milk. He distributes his drinks 
among the monkeys ; and if they do not eat, he breaks the pots 
containing curd and milk. When he does not find anything, 
being angry on the house-hold he goes away after having mad 
the infants cry aloud. When these things (milk, curd &c.) a 
placed beyond the reach of his hands, he creates expedient 
by piling wooden seats and mortars, &c. Again knowing thes 
to be concealed in pots hanging in swings, he will strik 
holes in them (pots). At times when the wives of the cow- 


herds will be occupied in the performance of household 
duties, he will finish his work of theft in dark rooms, making 
the jewels of his person serve. the purpose of lamps. He | 
perpetrates these and other harmful acts. He passes urine 
apd leaves excretions in cleansed houses. Thus committing 
deeds by thievish tricks, he lives near thyself like 
ntle boy.” Thus apprised of the misdeeds of Krishna, 

women who had been looking at his terrified eyes 
an@mis ma teital Tae, Yosodha only laughed and was not 
willing to chastise him. 

One day when Réma and other sons of the cow-herds 
were playing together, coming to mother Yasodhathey said 
unto her ‘ AXyishna hath eaten earth.? Yasodh&a desirous of 
his welfare holding him by the hand, repremanded him. 
His eyes indicated fear, and Yashodha thus spoke unto him. | 


‘O you naughty boy, why have you eaten earth in secret. | 
These boys, your companionsand your elder brother, are 
speaking to that effect ?’ : : 
‘Oh no mother, I have not a it; they are all liars. I 
you think they are truthful, you May examine my mouth.’ 
‘Very well, then open your mpiith.’ Thus spoken to, t 
Almighty Hari of unimpeded /prosperity, who had in 
sport assumed the form of a hufnan child, opened hi 
She saw inside it, the ssa? Hae the 


f 


T 
mohile creation, the etherealf@lome, the heay, 


re 
a 


Cc 


Details of a Polytechnic Academy proposed. 
for Surat. 


We have to thank Mr. Tribhuvandas Kalyandas Gajjar, M.A., whom 
‘we have not the pleasure of knowing personally, for a copy of his 
paper named “A Proposal for a Polytechnic Academy for Surat.” 
Mr. Tribhuvandas submits to us some definite proposal for one parti- 
cular place, and in doing so he has kept in view some of the leading 
principles enunciated in our pamphlet, explaining the grand scheme 
of how national technical education can be ‘introduced into India. 
Mr, Tribhuvan prefaces his paper by a passage from M, Dumas on the 
triumphs of science, but he has more practically quoted fram the speech 
of the Bombay Vice-Chancellor delivered at the last Convocation of the 
Bombay University :— 

“ The upholding hand of the State may properly transfer itself from that side of national edu- 
cation, where it planted both a demand for teaching and the knowledge how to supply it, to help 
in its turn another side, where at present there is Jittle either of knowledge or demand, That 
side is Technical Education.” 

Mr. Tribhuvandas is encouraged to suggest the formation of a Technical 
Academy for Surat owing to a Government Resolution of October last in 
which “they have expressed their desire of establishing at least one 
additional Training College.” We would rather not make much of a 
casual Government Resolution especially asthe Government of Lord Reay 
are desirous of giving their best attentionto the question of a broad 
administrative policy instead of continuing the stray and distracted action 
which has hitherto marked the proceedings of ali Governments in India 
on the subject of technical education, The writer would have Surat to 
emulate the examples set by Ahmedabad and Poona, which have several 
colleges, while Surat has none. To say the truth, we do not 
think too much of these colleges in special reference to the progress of 


42 


I 


teachings on popular trades and sciences. The genuine institutions in 
the technical line are wanting everywhere. The academical writer 
himself says that the apprentices brought up by native workmen are better 
than the students turntd out at the ‘Surat Parckh School of Art. We 
cannot, therefore, have much faith in the sort of institations which 
now-a-days pass as technical schools and colleges. The writer admits 
that “ the drawing and agricultural classes [at Surat]are attended by some 
few students of the High School to which these classes are attached ; and 
considering how only the elements of these arts are taught there, it is no 
wonder that they are not attended in larger numbers by the students than 
‘they now are.” And yet it isto stray funds, such asthe Surat Hindu 
‘Charity Fund, and to individuals and the Local Funds that he looks for 
the organization of durable technical institutions, Lord Reay can now 
intuitively feel the scope and spirit which have been ruling the domain of 
‘the so-called technical instruction in the Bombay Presidency, 

Mr, Tribhuvandas gives an outline of a Polytechnic Academy which he 
proposes for Surat. We fear he has not been able to grasp the genius 
which would render such an institution a practical success, for throughout 
the curriculum which he proposes for ali the sections of a Polytechnic 
Academy—though he is influenced by the cardinal principle of instruction 
which we have suggested for its reformation and devclopment—there 
is suggested a bewlidering scrics of ponderous, indefinite and multifarious 
studies which, no doubt, the old associations connected with the time- 
honored educational system of the country must yet suggest. 

The writer thinks that scientific and practical instructions could be 
introduced into primary schools by “scientific teachers” brought up by 
academical professors. The result would be no better than that marked 
in the Parukh School of Art, or in the various theoretic, cumbersome and 
opaque classes attached to some of our High Schools and Colleges. Mr. 
Tribhuvandas fits up the Academy with a museum, laboratory, workshop, 
physical cabinet and library, capable, as he thinks, of giving every assis- 
tance as respects chemical analysis, industry, commerce, agriculture, &c. 
Our scholarly scribes are apt to think that a Technical Academy is only 
to be personated by learned men filled with theoretic crudities, and 
stocked with conventional books and apparatuses ; and thus industries and 
tradcs will crop up among the people of the character and extent desired, 


43 


Mr. Tribhuvandas’ Academy, we find, is a jumble of every conceivable 
art and industry in a thin theory, and is likely «a Qe worse than the middle 
school, high school, college, or university of -*he present times. The 
features of the Academy are all exotic and t2smsported bodily from a 
radically different situation, and hardly bear vical relations with those 
actual circumstances and conditions of towns and districts and their 
various classes of inhabitants with different means and occupations 
which we have taken special pains to point out in relation to all the 
practical action and amelioration that could possibly be attempted. 
Mr. Tribhuvandas has tried to catch the idea of adapting every section 
of a school to a course of study according to the wants and requirements of 
that section, but the very preparatory course of one year which he 
suggests for students to fit themselves for the Academy, as also the course 
of general studies which all sections will have to commonly follow, are 
at once so Complicated and prohibitive, that a plain Collegiate or Univer- 
sity man_ will be less of a wearicd, impracticable and pedantic fellow than 
the fully baked creature which Mr, Gajjar’s Academy is likely to bring 
- forth, He would have a student who wishes to be either a common 
trader or an artist to pass in the following subjects after he has had his 
primary education :—The Gujrati and English languages, Indian Geo- 
graphy with detailed geography of Gujerat, Arithmetic, Geometry, Natural 
History, including preliminary notions of Zoology, Botany and Geology, 
Drawing and Caligraphy. Mr, Gajjar divides the Academy into five 
sections and prescribes a four years’ course to each section. Again, for 
¢ach year’s course he has certain subjects of instruction common to all 
sections and special ones for each section. It is an appalling curriculum 
which he prescribes for every one of the sections, For the very first 
year the common subjects are:—The Gujrati and English languages, 
History of India, Geography of the World, Arithmetic, Algebra, Geo- 
metry, Natural History, including Zoology, Botany, Geology and Physical 
Geography, Physics experimental, including general Physics, Heat and 
Meteorology, Chemistry—inorganic and metalloids, Drawing, Caligraphy, 
Commercial accounts and Book-keeping. The special subjects for Section 
1 the first year will be:—The higher Algebra, Plane Trigonometry, 
Practical Geometry, Organic, Agricultural and Analytical Chemistry, 
Vegetable Anatomy and Physiology, Anatomy and Physiology of Domestic 


; 44 


Animals, Mincralogy and Geology in relation to Agriculture, And this 
is the list for the stude-74 “ who desire to devote themselves exclusively 
to the study of agric Jture and farming.” Look again to the special 
course for Section 1 in tie third year:—Theory of Machinery and Mecha- 
nical designing of course in reference to Agriculture, Metcorology, Theory 
and Practice of Agriculture, Study of the Rearing of Animals, Theory 
of Farming, Rural and Forest Economy, Rural Architecture, Technology 
of branches of Industry connected with Agriculture, Agricultural 
accounts and Book-kceping. 


It is not necessary for a person wishing to be a cultivator to master 
Universal History, Jurisprudence, Astronomy, or Human: Physiology, 
Nor much of this could be useful to a common painter, sculptor, soap- 
maker, or one who wishes to accept service. Why should any of these 
have to learn Physics or Integral Calculus to turn out successful in the 
world ? Why should Mineralogy, Geology or Zoology be indispensable 
for Section 2? 

Mr, Tribhuvandas has earned the thanks of the public for boldly 
expressing his own views as to what a Polytechnic Academy should be 
like. He has done his duty, and it is certainly no fault of his, if he could 
only suggest, but could not comprehend, what a practical grasp of 
the question ought to be, His instance must serve to point out to 
Lord Reay what the result would be should the Educational Department 
alone be asked to prepare a scheme for polytechnic training. Such a 
scheme would only be most crude, Instead of aiming to prepare practical 
men capable of being engaged in various arts and industries, the students 
brought up under a purely or mostly academical system will be as discon- 
tented and impracticable alot as the present outturn of our schools and 
colleges. There would be too much of raw learning crammed in which 
must necessarily wither every special faculty and every special genius. To 
ally the most difficult orders of sciences and literature with the mere outside 

- fringe of a general trade or profession is the most unsuccessful method of 
bringing up a student in his proper avocation, The programme drawn up 
. by the writer is, no doubt, attractive, but it must excite our sincere pity if 
it were to be taken into more practical account than would suffice for the 
purpose of creating a set of refined professors—such grand examplars : of 
theories and inaction and the self-contented eulogists of silent universe, It 


o | 


is not to pure Academicians that the work. of designing for the national- 
industrial-instructional policy could be entrusted with any safety, Here we 
are forcibly reminded of the Conference alre uggested for preparing 
such a design, in the pamphlet already referred toy The Conference would 
be represented by the strongest members of several services and the 
communities which need not now be mentioned, Besides missing the 
urgency of being acquainted with the conditions which should influence 
the formation of specific schools and academies, Mr. Tribhuvandas 
altogether fails to understand what agencies would be successful for their 
practical working, He is himself a good example of a learned and worthy 
theorist in science, but if all were to be brought up according to his model, 
we should have perfectly exhausted creatures fit for nothing in particular 
in the directions where.our warmest sympathies lie. Let us say at once 
how fatal would be the blunder of basing our common policy on the highly 
proficient systems which have come into existence in Germany, France or 
England, after a patient and hereditary progress and development of 
upwards of a century. To say that an imitation of grown-up and hereditary 
Academies will remove Indian miseries, is to clothe the Brahmins in the 
costumes of British workmen and manufacturers, and take them as the 
industrial and mercantile classes of Europe. We must goto the root of 
the evil as it exists in the different representative parts of India and apply 
the remedies exactly suited to them, ‘The great policy of sincere and 
direct research of native well-fitted appreciation, and of acute specific 
organizations, which the treatise included in this work aims at indicating, 
is altogether different from the plain single-bladed fruition of a general 
Educational Department which will not easily yield in being mercilessly 
broken up in all directions to befit itself to the modern actualitics of 
human existence which alone have the strongest claims on our immediate 
and keenest sympathies,—16¢h May, 1886. . 


ud 


L 
a 


improving and enhancing the very life-blood of the country, We cannot 
have stronger and wiser men than Lords Dufferin.. Reay, Sir Alfred Lyall 
and Mr, Grant Duffin overcoming the financial difficulties which are 
certainly to be encountered in laying the basis for a complete national 
policy for the introduction of a full technical system into the country. We 
cannot for a moment doubt that this will imperishably remain as the real 
crowning work of British social and political organization and benevolence 
in India, In the same manner as the British Government has initiated | 
railway and public works, and established the postal system of the country, 
will it be necessary for that Government to found the national technical 
policy through every imperial and local agency available, No hope is 
susceptible of being more speedily blighted than that reposed in the people 
of India that they could first do anything significant in this direction, It 
is the united and statesmanlike effort of the Government itself which the 
task so imperatively needs, No one can know better than the good Earl 
himself, that to wait till the community of India comes to his aid, will be 
to let the miscrable Indian cart stick in the mud till Hercules descends 
from the skies to extricate it, A great policy has to be devised and 
launched which that fruitful genius, that keen perception, that unbroken 
resolution, and that warm ardor and enthusiastic humanity, of which the 
Earl of Dufferin may be said to be a matchless master in Oriental Asia, 
can almost intuitively perceive. And this is a task which—at the outset 
at least—the British Government has to handle with complete earnestness 
and alacrity, May we hope thatthis grand and national, most blessed 
work may be devised and founded in the regimé of a Viceroy as great a 
master in the arts of firmness as of patriotic benevolence and humanity. 
His Lordship cannot rely upon worthicr compatriots than Lord Reay and 
the others whom we have mentioned.—gth May, 1886, 


on 


SRiMADBHAGABATAM. 7 


with a slight reddish tint. Purged of all his sins at the 
very sight of Him, with a heart cleansed and calm, he fell 
at this feet. He then, reverentially bowed down to the 
primzval Purusha, whilst his eyes overflowed with the 
tears of devotion, and his hair stood on, the end from 
Gelight. With tears of tender regard, he drenched the stool 
of the lotus-feet of the illustrious Deity, and could not long 
dwell on his glories, for his utterance was choked with love 
and awe. Then having concentrated his mind by the help 
of his intellect and regained the power of speech, checking 
the outward actions of his organs of sense, he thus addressed 
the Preceptor of the worlds, whose image has been descri- 
bed in the scriptures of the Satatyas: 

‘CHITRAKETU said :—O Lord! unconquerable though chou 
art, yet thou art often vanquished by self-controlled sages 
of impartial minds; who again, in their turn, are conquered 
by thee; for exceedingly kind, thou surrenderest thyself to 
those devotees, who are free from desire. O almighty Being ! 
the creation, preservation and destruction of: the worlds are 
thy special privileges. The other gods vainly boast of their 
independence, for they are only portions of thy portions, 
while thou art the sole creator of the universe. As thou art 
found in the beginning, the middle, and the end of the atoms, as 
well as, in those of the largest created things, thou art absent 
in all three. Thou who dost exist in the begining, the middle, 
and the end of all truth, art surely immutable and eternal. 
Surely this mundane sphere is twenty times covered over 
with earth &c; but millions of such, seem no better than 
.atoms, in comparison with thyself, for thou art endless and 
infinite. Those beasts of men, who burn with a thirst for 
worldly advancement, worship those gods that preside 
over the same, and not thy hallowed self; but lord! with 
the extinction of these deities, their prosperity comes to an 
end, like the good fortune of the followers of a king when 
his line perishes. If those whose minds -are bent on real- 


72° SRIMADBHAGABATAMS 
ising “worldly desires, direct them towards thyself, who art all 
knowledge and excellence, they may escape the miseries of 
repeated births ; for plants do not grow out of fried seeds. 
It is when they are blinded _by their passions, that all the 
troubles and affliction of created_ beings, are generated. O 
unconquerable one! Thou dost indeed dwell in everything 
that is best, for thou hast explained the unblameable 
Bhagavat Dharma, to which, desirous of securing final beati- 


tude, even the self-satisfied and penniless sages betake 
themselves. 


“1” &mine”® you” and “your,” these and other 


terms of endearment—the effects of a perverse intellect— 
which are abundant in other systems, are scarcely to be found 
in tle religion expounded in the Bhagavat. Those (systems) 
which are the results of a perverted intellect, are surely im- 
pure; filled with impiety and are subject to decay. What 
benefit can be reaped from those systems of religion, the 
principles of which, inculcate an unqualified mortification 
of ourselves and others ? What purpose can they 
serve? By practising self-mortification, one’s temper grows 
irascible, and by oppressing others, one reaps sin. But 
Lord! thine eye never swerves, and out of it beams forth 
the bright light of the religion of the Bhagavat. It is 
followed by people desirous of final emancipation, who have 
\ ay got rid of a sense of distinction pervading the mobile, im- 
ne mobile and living world. O Lord! neither is it impossible 
{for the entire mass of our sins to vanish, at the mere sight of 
thy hallowed self ; an attentive hearing of the recital of thy 
name, liberates, even the Chandala, from the meshes of this 
mundane existence. O mighty Being! I am cleansed of 
all impurity, for I have seen thee. Wy shall the saying of 
the godly sage Narada, who is known to thee, be otherwise. 
All the endless variety of actions performed by men, is 
known to thee, \.ho art the soul of the universe. Like the 


fire-fly in relation to the sun, how can I enlighten thee” 
oe 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 3: 


on any point, who art the supreme‘preceptor. Salutations: 
unto the mighty Being, the Paramahansa, who is the original, 
‘stay, and destroyer of this universe ; whose real nature is- 
unrevealed to the puny sages on account of their sense of 
difference still existing in them. Salutation unto thee 
thousand headed deity on the putting forth of whose endea- 
vours, the other gods put forth their own, who exercising 
His power of vision, the sense organs perceive their objects 
and this mundane globe being placed on whose head, 
seems like a mustard seed. 

THE AusPicious SUKA said:—O enhancer of the glory 
of the Kurus {the mighty and infinite Lord, highly praised 
with this hymn, thus replied to Chitraketu chief of the 
Vidyadharas. . 

THE AUSPICIOUS BHAGAVAN said :—O king! thou art 
indeed emancipated, for thou hast seen me, art con- 
versant with the knowledge imparted to thee by Narada 
and Angir& and hast listened to my precepts preached to thee 
by them. I constitute all created beings, and am their 
soul and protector. Sabdhabrahma and Parambrahma are 
my two eternal bodies. Behold! the soul pervading this 
universe, and the universe pervading the soul ; I pervade both 
of them, and they both are made of me. Even as one, in 
a state of profound slumber, sees the different regions of the 
universe in his own self, and thinks himself, whilst the same 
state continued, awake, and situated in a particular spot, 
so know the waking state ect. of animated beings, to be the 
hallucinations of the. mind; therefore do thou worship the.great 
being who is the spectator of them all. Know me to be the 
supreme soul Brahma, who is devoid of all the properties of 
matter, and through whose agency even a person who was 
fast asleep remembers his own slumber and happiness experi- 
enced during it. That knowledge is the Supreme Brahma 
which is found by a person remembering his experiences 
both during sleep and wake, to be the connevting link 

10 


14 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


as well as the separating medium between the two states. 
But when a _ person forgets this my true nature, 
and thinks himself independent of me, then is he 
merged into worldliness, and compelled to assume form 
after form and suffer death after death. At notime and no 
where can he expect to reap good, who can not enlighten 
his mind with self-knowledge even when blessed with human 
existence, in which there is room for the acquirement of 
the knowledge of perception and inference. So the sages, 
knowing, troubles and unexpected reversions of conse- 
quences to be the outcomes of desire, and final beatitude 
to be the fruit of absence of desire, annihilate all their 
wishes and expectations. The husband and the wife 
both perform various actions, either for the advancement 
of their worldly interest or for avoiding misery; but by 
these acts neither is their misery ended, nor is their 
happiness enhanced. Thusa person, knowing the per- 
verseness of those who are proud of their own wisdom, and 
realising the subtle fourth state of the soul, and being 
liberated by their own spiritual energy from the ties of this 
world and the next, and imbued with the knowledge of 
perception and inference, become devoted to me. Those 
wise men, whose intellects are skilled in Yoga, think the 
realisation of the Supreme Soul (within the mind), to be the 
greatest good possible to mankind. O king! if thou, remem- 
berest my words with reverence and care, then being 
possessed of the knowledge of perception and inference thou 
shalt be emancipated without delay. 

Tue Auspicious SukA said—The Almighty Hari, the 
preceptor and Soul of the universe, after having consoled 
Chitraketu, disappeared even before his very eyes. 


SRiIMADBHAGABATAM. 75 


CHAPTER XVII. 


Te AUSPICIOUS SUKA continued :—The Bidhyadhara, 
Chitraketu, then, having bowed down his head in the direction 
of that quarter of heaven into which the Endless Being had 
disappeared, began to wander in the sky. Of indefatiguable 
strength and possossing acute senses he, roved (for thousand 
and thousands of years) in the caverns of the Ku/déchala, where 
beings often realise their desires; there he made the 
wives of the Vidydharas hymn the great Lord Hari, wifilst 
the ascetics, Siddhas and Charanas, sang in praise of himself 
who was a great Yogi. Once on a time when travelling in the 
shinning car presented to him by Vishnu, he found Girisha 
(the Lord of mountains) surrounded by Siddhas and Chiranas. 
He saw him (the god) in the midst of the assembly of the 
ascetics, embracing with his arms his wife, seated on his lap. 
Then with a loud laugh, he uttered the following words even 
in the very presence of the Goddess. 

CHITRAKETU said :—Such then is the conduct of the pre- 
ceptor of the worlds, the teacher of all corporeal beings? 
He is sitting in the assemblage of sages, coupled with his 
wife. Like a low shameless wight, he is presiding in the 
assembly, with his wife on his lap, although he wears knot- 
ted hair on his head, and is renowned for his severe religious 
austerities and knowledge of Brahma. Generally even 
mean fellows indulge in dalliance with their wives in secret ; 
but this observer of high vows, is enjoying the company of 
his wife in the presence of this gathering.” 

O king | hearing these words, the mighty god, whose intellect 
was fathomless, gently smiled and remained silent, and the 
other members of the assembly followed his example. But the 


75. -SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


«goddess, greatly wrathful with that graceless one, who was 
; proud of his owa self-control and ignorant of her prowess, and 
. who had uttered:very many indecent words before her, said :— 
-“Is:this fellow now a ruler among men? Does he wield a 
:.Scepter, or is any -power of life and death vested in him ? 
He seems to be very inimical to the wicked and shameless 
beings, like ourselvest The lotus-born Brahma, his sons 
“Narada, ‘Veigu and others, Kumara, Kpila and Manu, are all 
ignorant of the ordinances of religions ? They do not stop 
Hara. as.,transgressing the scriptural rules. This most im- 
pertinent ,and vile Kshatrya—who, contemning the wise. 
and the learned, reproves the preceptor of the world whose 
lotus-feet are.meditated on by the above mentioned gods, and. 
whe is the -holy of holies,—is surely deserving of condign 
punishment. <Neither is this person worthy of attaining the 
_feet of Vaikuntha (Krishna), reverentially worshipped by the 
. great sages ;for he is insolent-and full of egotism. O sont 
. therefore do thou be degenerated into the wicked existence 
_of the ‘Asuras, so that thou mayst not be able to harm the 
great, any, longer. 

THE Auspicious SuKA said:—Oh Bharata! thus accur- 
_sed, Chitraketu descended from his car and tried to propi-. 
.tiate Sati, saluting her with his bent head. 

CHITRAKETU-said :—O Ambika (I do receive thy curse,with 
my folded hands; for what is spoken by the gods to mortals 
iis surely ,their destiny. Everywhere and at every time, ani- 
mals blinded with ignorance, being turned on the wheel of 
life, come upon happiness and misery. Neither self nor any 
other agent.is the creator of happiness or misery; the igno- 
rant only, think them to be so. This world is an illusory 
river of the principles and in it there is no very great distinc- 
tion betweea a curse and grace, heaven, and hell, and hap- 
piness and misery. The One supreme Deity through his own 
illusive energy creates beings,their happiness and misery, and 
their freedom and slavery, but He himself is devoid of 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 7 


them. He-has none sharing his love and none sharing his 
hate; he has neither relatives nor kindred, neither friend 
nor foe. Regarding every one and every thing, with an even: 
eye, that unstained Being has no attachment for happiness 
and so there is no room for anger in him. Still, righteous or 
otherwise, the actions, which are done through his energy 
of illusion, are capable of producing the happiness or misery 
the weal or woe, the bondage or freedom, and the life,~death 
or worldliness of beings. Therefore, O wrathful goddess ! do 
not think, that am trying to appease thee, so that thow 
mayst release me from my curse ; but, O most chaste lady ! 
Ibeg thy pardon for having uttered anything that thow 
mayst consider as wrong. 

O repressor of enemies! thus having appeased both 
Girisha and his consort, Chitraketu went away in his own 
car, before their wondering eyes. Then the God Rudra 
spoke to the goddess Rudrani in the following manner, 
whilst the divine sages, the Daityas, the Siddhas, and others 
present in the assembly, listened to him, 

THE AUSPICIOUS RuDRA said :—O thou of a dainty waist, 
dost thou appreciate the nobleness of the high-souled ser- 
vants—-cherishing no desire—of Hari that God of wonderful 
‘deeds. Those persons who are greatly devoted to Narayana, 
are afraid of none; they look upon Heaven, Hell, and 
Emancipation with an equal eye. In his sport the supreme 
God dispenses bodily forms to corporeal beings in conse- 
quence of possessing which, the duality of happiness and 
misery, life and death, and, curse ‘and ‘grace visits them. 
The difference which persons find between prosperity and 
adveksity in respect of themselves, is, like the mistake of 
confounding a garland. with a serpent, the result of ignor- 
ance. Those people, who bear (a heart-felt) reverence to- 
wards Vasudeva, and whose source of power is their know- 
ledge and absence of worldly desire, have no other protector 
to seek. Neither myself, nor Virinchi nor Kum4ra nor Narada, 


78 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


nor the sons of Brahmé, nor the ascetics, nor the chiefs among 
gods, can dive into his designs. How is it, then, possible for 
those gods who are only composed of very small portions of 
him, and who think themselves independent, to understand 
His real nature? He has no object of love or of hate 
neither friend nor foe; he being: the soul of every being, 
is beloved of all. This great, peaceful and impartial 
Chitraketu, is a very favourite follower of Achutya and soam 
I. Therefore, thou shouldst not wonder at the conduct of 
the peace-loving, high-souled and impartial devotees of the 
great Lord. 

THE AUSPICIOUS SUKA said :—O king! the goddess Uma, 
having heard the words of the almighty Siva, became very 
much satisfied and all her doubts were dispelled. Though 
Chitraketu could have cursed the goddess in revenge, yet he 
did not do it, but took her curse on his own head ; surely 
this indicated his high moral nature. Chitraketu then 
sprang as a Danava out of the sacrificial Dakshinagui of 
Lastré; and he was called Vritra and was gifted with 
a knowledge direct and inferential. I have now answered 
your question in detail, regarding the cause of Vritra’s 
birth in the Asura class, and his attachment towards the 
great Lord. By hearing of this sacred history of the 
high-souled Chitraketu, and of the glory of the devotees of 
Krishna, men are released from the fetters of this existence. 
He, who, with his thought fixed on Hari, every morning 
recites this history with reverence and with accurate enuncia- 
tion, attains to the best and highest mode-of existence. 


” SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 19 


CHAPTER XVIII. 


Tue AUSPICIOUS SUKA said :—O great observer of vows! 
Prisni, the wife of Sabitéa, gave birth to Savitri,.Vyahriti, 
Trayee, Agnihotra, Pasu, Soma, Chaturmasya, and the 
Mohamakhas ; and Bhaga’s wife, Sidhi, gave birth to, 
Mahima, Bivu, and Pravu, and to a most beautiful daughter 
named Assi. The wives of Dhat&, Kuhu, Sineebali, Raka 
and ‘Anumati, respectively brought forth Sayam, Darsa, 
Prata and Purnamasa. Samanantra on his wife Krya, begot 
the Fires, called the Purishyas. Charsani was the wife of 
Varuna, and bore in her womb Bhrigu, and also the Yogte 
Valmiki who formerly was born out of ant-hills. Agastya and 
Vashista were the common sons of the sage Mitra and 
Varuna, for both these Rishis, fired with lust at the sight of 
Urvasi, dropped in her presence their seed in the same 
earthen pot. Mitra also generated three other sons, by name 
Utsarga, Arista and Pippala, on his (duly married) wife 
Raibati. 

QO son! we also heard that Indra begot on his wife 
Paulomi, three sons, whose names were Jayanta, Rishava, and 
Midrusa. On his wife Kirti, Urukrama, who had through his 
Maya formerly assumed the form of a dwarf, begot a son 
named Brihatsloka. He (Brihatsloka) also became the father 
of Souvaga and others. We shall tell you in detail here-in-after, 
all about the prowess, qualifications and actions, of the high- 
minded Kagyapa, and how he was procreated in Aditi. 

Now I shall tell you all about those sons of Kagyapa, who 
were called Daityas, and among whom were the auspicious 
Vali and Prahlada, the devotees of Vishnu. Diti had twe 
sons, by name, Hiranyakagipu and Hiranaksha who were 
held in great estimation both by the Daity as and the Dana- 
vas. The, Danavi Kayadhu, daughter of Jamva, the 


80 SRIMADBHAGABATAMN. 


wife of Hiranyakacipu gave birth to four sons, named 
Sanghrada, Anuhrada, Hrada and Prahlada. Their sister 
Sinhika, given in marriage to Viprachita, became the mother 
of Rahu, whose head Hari cut off with his disc whilst he 
‘was in the act of drinking Amrita (ambrosia). “Mati the 
,wife of Sanghrada, gave birth to Panchajana. Hrdda’s wife, 
Dhamani brought forth Batapi and Ilbala; this Ilbala cooked 
Vatapi for the meal of Agastya who had repaired to them 
as a guest. Vaskala and Mahisa were the sons of Anu- 
hrada, by his wife Surya; and Virochana was the off-spring 
.of Prahlada by his wife Drarvi Virochana begot Vali, who 
again, on his wife, Asana, begot an hundred sons, the eldest 
of whom was Vana. His (Vali’s) fame, which is worthy of 
being expatiated on, shall be described hereinafter. This 
Vana, after a prolonged worship of Girisha, obtained the 
leadership of his (Girisha’s) followers; and even now the 
great Lord could be found with him, as the guardian of 
his city. The forty-nine Marutas, (wind) gods were also 
the sons of Diti. Having no issue, they were rendered homo- 
geneous with the gods, by Indra. 

Tue AUSPICIOUS KING said :—O preceptor! how were 
these Marutas rendered homogenous with the gods, by 
Indra? And how did they relinquish their Asura nature, 
which had been born with them? What good did thy do 
to Indra? O Brahman} these sages with myself, are very 
anxious, of knowing ,all about this matter; therefore mighty 
being, be pleased to explain it to us, 

THE Auspicious SuTa said:—O Satrayanay Vada- 
rayani, versed in all knowledge, hearing with regard the 
king’s few but sensible words, sincerely praised him, within 
his heart, and thereafter thus spoke. 

THE [AusPicious SUKA said,:—Diti, whose sons were 
all s'ain by Indra, with whom had sided the great Vishnu, 
thus began to think within herself, whilst she was! burning 
with the fire of rage, kindled by sorrow. 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 81 


“When shall I rest in peace, after having destroyed that 
crooked, heartless and sinful Indra, who slew his brothers 
and who is given to the gratification of his senses. The 
designation, even of that body, which now belongs to one 
who is called a lord, was nothing more than worms, filth or 
ashes. Then, can he be said to know his own interests, who 
oppresses others for the benefit of such a body, seeing 
that, as a penalty for such tyrany, he is sure to be condemn- 
ed to a life in hell ? -Any how I must have a son, powerful 
enough to humble Indra’s pride, who has grown very arro- 
gant by thinking this (frail) body to be ever-enduring. O 
king! knowing the compassing of the pleasures of her 
husband, to be the best means of securing her object, 
that woman, intimate with the knowledge of human natufe, 
very soon ‘succeeded in ingratiating herself into his good 
graces, by means of love, self-control, attachment, devo- 
tion, sweet words, smiles, and side-long glances. In. this 
way even a learned man, is made a slave by his beautiful 
wife. When this hen-pecked husband is reduced to this 
plight, it is no wonder, that he should say ‘yea’ to every 
wish of his wife. In the beginning, the lord of men, 
(Prajapati,) finding the male ‘portion of created beings 
companionless, out of the remaining half of his body, 
created the females by whom the fancy of people has been 
ensured,’ 

O son! the mighty Kacyapa greatly pleased with the ser- 
vices of his wife Diti, one day greeting her, thus smilingly 
spoke unto her. . 

THE auspicious KAcYAPA said :—O unblamable female 
of shapely thighs! Iam pleased with thee, ask any bapn 
of me. What object of desire in this or in the next 
world, can not be realised by a female, whose husband 
is pleased with her? A husband is truly- said to be 
the supreme deity to his wife. The great lord Vasudeva, 
_ the heart of every being and the husband of Sri, is worship- 

Il 


82 ; SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


ped in the person of the gods, by people who ascribe ‘to him 
different images and names; but by women he is worship- 
ped in the person of their husbands. Olady. of. slender 
waist ! therefore it is, that wives devoted to their husbands, 
and desirous of their own welfare, should with a singleness of 
purpose worship their husbands who are their soul and 
highest deity. O gentle woman! as I—thine husband—have 
been worshipped with reverence by thee in this manner, I am 
willing to gratify that desire of thine, which is incapable ‘of 
being attained by unchaste women. 

Diti said:—O Brahman! if thou art disposed to confer 
on me a boon, grant me an immortal ,son who shall be 

/powerful enough to kill Indra, who has murdered both of 
my sons and made me a bereaved mother. 

Hearing her words the Vipra became greatly agitated 
and lamented saying :— 

‘O what great sin hath clung to me to-day ? Wretch that I 
am, I shall without doubt be hurled to hell, for I have suffered 
my heart to be captivated by the charms of a woman, and 
for I find pleasure in wealth and in the enjoyment of the 
senses. What can be the fault of this woman, seeing that 
she has only followed the propensity of womanly nature! 
Fie fie on me, who am ignorant of my own interests, and who 
have lost my self-control. Who can penetrate into the purpos- 
es of women, whose faces are like full-blown autumnal lotuses, 
whose speech is as nector to the ear, but whose hearts are 
sharp like razors? Truly women bent on realising their own 
desires, do not stay for their beloved beings; they can them- 
selves murder their husband, sons or brothers, or cause them 
to be murdered (by others). I can not belie my promise of 
granting her desires, nor is Indra deserving of death; the 
following, meseems, is the best means to pursue.’ 

O son of Kuru! thinking thus within himself, the great 
Maricha, whilst blaming his own thoughtlessness, angrily 
spoke. 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 83 


‘THE AUSPICIOUS KACYAPA said:—O gentle dame | if thou 
strictly observest the following religious vow, thou shalt be 
Blessed witha son who will be friendly to the enemies of 
the gods and who will slay Indra. 

THERE AT Ditt said:—O Brahman! { will observe the 
vow ; tell me what acts are to be performed (by me) and what 
are prohibited; and also, what acts shall destroy. (the due 
observance) of the vow. 

THE AUSPICIOUS KACYAPA said :—Thou shalt not oppress 
any being, curse (any creature) or utter any falsehood; 
neither ‘shalt thou cut thy nails, nor shave thine hair, nor 
touch inauspicious things or beings; nor bathe in water nor 
indulge in anger nor hold converse with the wicked. (Thou 
shalt not)’ wear unwashed clothes, or garlands worn by others ; 
thou shalt- not eat any food cooked by a Vrisala, polluted 
by ant, or touched by a woman in her courses; neither shalt 
thou take the leavings of meals, nor any kind of flesh. Thou 
shalt drink water with thy joined hands. Thou shalt not 
go out on the evening, without having previously touched 
water or curbed thy speech, or-with thy body unclean and 
uncovered, and bare of ornaments, or with thy hair dishevel- 
led. Thou shalt not lie down, without; having duly washed 
thy feet, or with thy feet wet, or with thy head placed towards 
the north or the west, or with any body else, or with thy per- 
son nude; or during either of the twilights. Wearing washed 
garments, with thy mind and body purified and clensed, thou 
shalt worship, before taking thy morning meal, cows, Vipras, 
Sri, and Achutya. Thou shalt also worship those women 
whose husbands are alive, with garlands, perfumes, and 
ornaments. Thou shalt also serve thy husband, having adored 
him; and also meditate on thy husband conceiving him to 
be within thy abdomen. | 

If, for a year, thou canst strictly observe this vow capable 
of conferring offspring on people, thou shalt have a son 
equal to the destruction of Indra. 


84 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


O king! the high-minded: Diti, having assented; was 
impregnated by Kacyapa, and began the observance of her 
vows in right earnest. O bestower of honor! the sagacious 


"Indra being apprised of the designs of his mother’s, sister, 


went to her hermitage, and tried to please her by serving her 
in many ways. Every day, at the proper time, he presented her - 
with flowers, fruits, roots, Kuga, sacrificial fuel, leaves, earth, 
water, and sprouts gathered from the forest. O king, like a 
cunning deer-hunter, disguised in the form,of a deer, Indra 
waited upon Diti, absorbed in the performance of her vow, 
for the purpose of detecting any flaw in the discharge of her 
vow. But, O lord of the earth! with all his sharpness, Indra 
could not find out a single flaw, in the observance of her 
vow. Thereat he was oppressed with extreme anxiety, 
and pondered over the means of realising his own welfare. 
One evening, as ill-luck would have it, she became unclean, 
and fatigued in consequence of the severity of her religious 
observances, she fell asleep, clean forgetting either to touch 
water or to wash her feet therewith. Espying this fault, at 
that. moment, Indra, versed in Yoga, by means of his Yoga 
energy, entered into the womb of Diti, deprived of conscious- 
ness by sleep. Then with his thunderbolt, he sundered in 
seven her foetus of golden effulgence; and again he civided 
each of these (crying out in pain) into seven other parts, at 
the same time bidding them not tocry, O king! when Indra 
was in the act of cutting them, these parts of the feétus, 
with joined hands said ;—‘Wherefore dost thou torture us? 
We are thy brothers, Marutas hy name.’ The Kausika said, 
‘never fear; you all are my bothers having the same nature 
with me; and shall be mine own followers, and called Maru- 
tas’. Like thyself, who did not die by the arms of Drona’s 
son, through the mercy.of Srinivasa, thp foetus inside Diti’s 
womb, though wounded in many places with the thunderbolt, 
did not die on account of the mercy of the same Srinivasa. 
By worshipping the first Being even once, men obtain the 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 85 


self-same form’ with the -Purusha.. Then how was ‘it possi- 
ble ‘for Diti’s foetus to be destroyed, considering that she 
adored Him for nearly a year? These Marutas with Indra 
raised the number of the gods to fifty; these were made to 
drink Soma by Hari, after their mother’s defects had been 
purged out of them. Awaking, Diti found her sons radiant 
like fire, standing before her with Indra. That stain- 
less lady was greatly rejoiced at the sight. Then after a 
while she asked Indra saying, “O son, I underwent the 
severities of this vow, with the view of obtaining a son, who 
would be‘a terror to the celestials ; | expected to have one - 
child only, : how comes it, that there are nine and forty sons. 
Relate to me the truth—if you know it—about this matter; | 
but speak no falsehood. 2 

INDRA said :—O mother! selfish and impious, J, coming to 
know the end of thine endeavours, have come to thee and de- 
tecting a foible in thy self, have destroyed thy foetus. Thy 
foetus cut in seven peices by me, has become seven male child- 
ren, each of these again was divided into seven parts. Still 
they did not die. Having seen this marvel, I ascertained, thou 
hast attained unto some great success, which sometimes fol- 
lows the worship of the great Being. Those persons, who are 
free from all desire, and who worship the almighty God-head 
without even cherishing the wish of realising the final 
beatitude, are said to know their interest well. What wise 
men would worship god, the soul, thelord of the universe. 
and the giver of spiritual advancement, with the view of 
asking worldly prosperity of him, which can be found even 
-ip hell, 

O high-minded lady, O mother} it behoveth thee to forgive 
the wickedness of me, a crooked wretch, in as much as thy 
“foetus has revived by a stroke of good Yortune. 

THE AuSPICIOUS SUKA said:—Then Indra, with the 
permission of the highly-delighted Diti, led her with the 
Marutas to Heaven. Thus I have told you all about the 


86 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


question that you had put to me, regarding the auspicious 
birth of the Marutas. Inform me, what shall I relate to 
you next. 


—_—99——__——. 


CHAPTER XIX. 


Te AUsPICIOUS KING said:—O Brahmana! I wish to 
know the Vrata Pungsavana, which you have mentioned even 
now and the performance of which gratifies Vishnu. 

, THE AUSPICIOUS SUKA said:—In the beginning of the 
light half of the month of Margasira a wife with the per- 
mission of her husband, should commence the performance 
of this vow, which is capable of conferring all our desires 
on us. Having bathed, cleansed her teeth, and worn a white 
apparel and ornaments, she should question concerning 
the birth of the Marutas, the Brahmanas, and hear from 
them an account thereof; and then she should worship the 
Great one with Sri, before eating her morning meal, 

“Salutation unto thee who hast created all things, to 
thee who art impartial and who hast attained the fruition of 
every desire. Salutation unto thee, who art the Lord of the 
great goddess of fortune, and in whom dwell all the Siddhis. 
Thou art truly called the Great one, and the Lord for mercy, 
prosperity, prowess, glory, energy and all other divine excel-. 
lences wait upon thee. Salutation unto ‘thee, O mother 
of the Universe! O wife of Vishnu, O mighty illusion! O 
thou, that art endowed with all the marks of the Mahb4purusha. 
O thou of almighty parts, be propitious unto me. Salutations 

‘unto that Great one, the Mabapurusha, the most magnani- 
mous (being) andthe lord of the Goddess of good fortune 
staying together with her; I offer thee these things as sac- 
tifices.” Invoking Vishnu with this sacred formula, offerings 


SRIMADBUAGABATAM. 87 


of Arghya, of water: for washing the feet and for ablution, 
of bathing garments, a sacred thread, ornaments, fragrant 
substances, incense, a lamp, and with other articles, should 
be made with a concentrated mind. Then with the rem- 
nants of the sacrifices, twelve offerings should be burnt in 
the fire, with the following sacred formula. ‘Om! salu- 
tations unto the almighty Mahapurusha, the lord of the God- 
dess of good fortune, Shaha’. If one is desirous of securing 
all worldly prosperity, he should, every day worship with a 
devoted heart, Sri and Vishnu, who both are the bestowers 
of all boons and who are the sources of all benediction. 
Then bowing down his head to the ground, with his heart 
overflowing with devotion, one shouldten times meditate 
this sacred formula within himself, and then he should 
chant this hymn. ‘Ye both are the rulers of the Universe, 
the prime causes of the worlds, This one is Prakriti, the 
subtle, insurmountable illusive energy. Thou art her lord 
andthe excellent Purtisha. Thou art all sacrifice, whilst 
this goddess is the labour undergone in the performances of 
the sacrifices; she constitutes the acts performed during the 
sacrifices, whilst thou dost appropriate the fruits of all these. 
This goddess is the emanation of the principles, whilst thou 
art their emblem and thou also enjoyest these. Verily, thou 
art the soul of all corporeal beings, thou art their good for- 
tune, thou art their bodies, their senses, and their lives. Thou 
art the mighty designation and the form. Thou art the 
revealer of these and their abode. O illustrious ones! Ye 
both are the supreme Deities and the bestowers of boons. 
May all blessing betide us through your grace)’ 

After this eulogy, the offerings should be taken away, and 
then Srinivasa—the conferrer of boons—with Sree, should 
be worshipped, with water offered for washing their mouth. 
Then the leavings of the sacrifice, should be smelt, and Hari 
should be again praised with hymns and worshipped with 
heart full of reverence. The wife should also devotedly 
worship the husband, identifying him with the Mahapurusha 
and should furnish him with those things which he likes. 
The husband, with a loving heart, should in his turn, perform 
in conjunction the Various acts, great and small, which she 
shall perform. The husband and the wife, are both equally 
entitled to its benefits, even when the vow is observed by 
either of them. If the wife is disqualified to perform it, the 
husband shall observe it with a proper concentration of 
mind. If this vow, to Vishnu, is duly observed, with offerings 
of wreaths, perfumes and ornaments given to Brahmanas 


88 ‘4 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


and married ladies, then the performer is never separated 
from his or her children. In it the great Hari, shall always 
be worshipped with proper devotion and rites. 


Then allowing the Deity to repair to his own residence, 
one should, for the purification of self, and the gratification 
of all desires, eat the'things offered to the God. 


Thus having spent a year, or twelve months in the per- 
formance of this religious ceremony, a chaste woman 
should observe a fast, on the last dpy of the month of Karézka. 
At the break of the following day, having rinsed his mouth, 
with water and worshipped Krishna, her husband should 

; offer into the fire; twelve oblations consisting of Charu with 
clarified butter, duly cooked in milk, according to the rules 
of cooking sacrificial oblations. Then taking on his head 

‘the blepsings pronounced by the pleased Brahmanas, he 
should “bow down to them with reverence, and then begin 
eaing his meal (portion of the Charu). Thien curbing his 
speech, he accompanied by his friends and having his precep- 
tor before him, should hand over to his wife the remainder; 

* of the Charu, which is capable of conferring progeny and 
.good fortupe. 


Duly performing this ceremony, a person obtains his’ 
objects of desire ; and when observed by a woman, it confers 
on her good fortune, prosperity, children, reputation, and: 
abode, and bestows ‘longivity to her husband. By obser-, 
ving it,a maiden is blessed with a excellent husband, a 
widow obtains the best of existences on being purged of all 
her sins, A bereaved mother has her sons revived and be- 
comes mistress of vast wealth; a wretched woman turns 
fortunate, an ugly and bad-looking woman, becomes fair and 
beautiful, and the sick and the suffering, being cured of their, 
maladies, obtain new and able bodies, with all their senses 
in tact. A reading of this account, at the ceremonies known 
as the Abhyudayas, greatly pleases Gods and the deceased 
forefathers ; and at the end of Homas, Hari, (the God of) 
Fire, and Sree, very much gratified, grant us all our desires. 


O king ! now I have recounted unto you, the holy (history 
of the) birth of the Marutas, and also the (history of the) 
great vow of Diti. 


Enpb oF Book VI. 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 79 


said to Vali):—O thou having the army like that of Indra, 
O great king, may good bétide thee; do thou, encircled by 
thy kinsmen, proceed to Sutala Which is aspired after .even 
by the celestials, What to speak of others even the Loka- 
palas shall not be able to vanquish thee there; my discus 
shall despatch those Daityas who shall transgress thy 
commards. I shall perfectly protect thee along with thy 
retinue and dresses ; thou shalt always, O hero, behold me 
near that place. And thine demonaic ideas (created) in the 
company of Daityas and D&navas shall be immediately des- 
troyed by thine beholding of my prowess. 


- Ages 
darmowe L) meme : 
beh. = wt 
CHAPTER XXIV. a, 
j Sey) VVG,58% 


Tie AUSPICIOUS SUKA said:—The high-mitded Val 
liked'by all: the sages, having his eyes filled with tears be 
gotten of joy and with folded hands, said in accents choked 
with tears, to the ancient Purusha who had said this. 

Tue Ausricious VALI said :—Oh! even the attempt at the 
salutation unto thee, is capable of accomplishing the object of 
thige votaries, since this has made this vile Asura the object 
of thine favour which was not obtained before even by th 
Lokapalas. 

‘THE auspicious SUKA said :—Thereupon having said t 
Vali bowed unto Hari,—Brahma with Bhava, and being rel 
edj entered Sutala with the Asuras. Having‘thus conferr 
upjon Indra the-three worlds and satisfied the desire of Adi 
the Lord governed the entire universe ; and beholding his owt 
gyand-son, released, attain to (the Lord’s) favour, Prahlada, 
oyer-flowing with devotion, said. 


80 ; SRIMADBHAGABATAM. . 


‘THE AUSPICIOUS PRAHLADA said :—O lord having thine 
feet adored by those who are adored by the entire universe, 
this thine favour, that thou becomest the protector of the 
forts of the Asuras, even Brahma, Maheswara and Lakshmi 
have not obtained, what to speak of others. By drinking 
the honey of thine lotus-feet Brahm& and other celestials 
have been enjoying their respective prosperity ; how have 
we, born in the wicked and deceiptful species, attained to the 
position of thine merciful looks ? Thine action is wondrous ; 
by thy illusive energy above the range of meditation, thou 
dost easily create this universe; and being omniscient and 
omnipresent thou dost impartially look towards all ;. thy 
nature it is hard to reconcile ; being fond of thine votaries 
thou dost assume the nature of an all-giving tree. 

The Lord said :—May good betide thee, O Prahlada—do 
thou go to Sutala and enhance the delight of thy kinsmen, 
being in the company of thy grandson. Thou shalt always 
beliold me stationed there with the mace in my hand; the 

tters of action shall be snapped by the delight of thine 

eing me. 

THE AUSPICIOUS SUKA said:—O king, the pyre-minded 

rahlada, along with Vali, having placed his folded hands 
on his’ head, accepted the command of the Lord; and the 
leader of all the Asura hosts, having circumambulated the 
rime Purusha with humility and at his behest, oop 


a 


utala. Thereupon, O king, Narayana said to Sukra wip, 
yas seated near amongst the Ritwijas in the assembly lof 
se who are conversant with Brahman :—“Do thou now, 
Brahman, make up the deficiency of thy disciple in the 
bration of sacrifice, since all inequalities in action ate 
dered equal by the look of a Brahmana.’’ 

) SUKRA said :—How can there be inequality of action for . 
m by whom thou, the lord of action, the sacrificial mal 
ving and lord of sacrifices, hast been worshipped by all 
eans, All the deficiencies arising from Mantra, Tantra and 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 81 


from the distinction; of place, time and ‘person as well as from 
presents, are rendered whole by the recital of thy glories; 
still, since thou. sayest, I'shall carry: oat: thy command, O 
great one, for the greatest well-being of men consists in 
satisfying thy behest. Thus delighting in Hari’s command; 
Ushanas, along with all the Brahmana saints, made up the 
deficiency of Vali’s sacrifice. O king, having thus begged 
the earth of Vali, in the shape of a dwarf Hari conferred 
the three worlds upon his brother Indra which had been 
pilfered by his enemies, Thereupon for accomplishing the 
‘pleasure of Kacyapa and Aditi and the well-being of all 
creatures, the celestials, Rishis, manes, Manus, Daksha, Vrigu, 
Angiras and other Munis, the patriarch Brahma along with 
Mahesha and Kumara made that dwarf lord over the regions 
and the Lokapalas. Then the dwarf expert in protecting 
allthe Medas, the deities, Dharma, fame, prosperity, aus- 
pidows lc ecnontes heaven and emancipation, was appointed 
Upendfa for the prosperity of all; and all the creatures, O 
king, greatly delighted thereat. Thereupon Indra obtaining 
the three worlds and placing that Dwarf before (him) in the 
celestial car, welcomed by Brahma and the Lokapalas, took 
him to heaven. Indra (governed) it by the strength of the 
arms of Upendra; and enveloped with great prosperity and 
having his fear removed, he was delighted. Brahma, Siva, 
Kumara, Vrigu and other ascetics, O king, the manes, all the 
cre tures, Siddhas and celestial beings, eulogising that 
Slice action of the Divine Vishnu, repaired to their 
respective quarters. And Aditi’s fame was established all 
over. O Parikshit, I have thus recounted to you, in entirety, 
the glories of the Lord of great prowess, which remove the 
sing of the hearers. One, whocan by force see the end of 
thel glories of the highly powerful Lord, can count the sands of 
the earth. Thus the persons versed in Shastras have said :-— 
‘Wiho amongst men, born and about to be born, has attained 
to jthe other side of the glories of the Perfect Purusha? He 
It 


&a act MADBHAGABATAM. 


who ‘listess zz this account of the incarnation of -Hari of 
wonderful deeds, the God of Gods, attains to an vexcellent 
state. And wherever, in sacrifices for the gods, in rites for 
the manes and social ceremonials, this story of the incarna- 
tion is recounted all the actions are duly performed; even this 
as known by the learned.” 


eee 


CHAPTER XXIV. 


fa KING said :-—‘‘ O thou gifted with spiritual wealth, 
I wish to hear of the first incarnation of Hari of: wonderful 
deeds in which a fish-form was assumed (by him) through his 
illusory powers. Why did the Lord, like one assailed by ac- 
tions, assume the fisli-form hated of all and irrepressible for its 
partaking of the quality of darkness ; it behoveth thee, O thou 
gifted with spiritual wealth, to relate the account of the illus- 
trious Lord, conducive to the felicity of all. 

Tue Auspicious Suka said:—Being thus accosted by 
Parikshit, the divine Vadarayani related the account of 
Vishnu when he assumed. the form of a fish. 

THE AUSPICIOUS SUKA said :—He, at times, assumes forms 
being desirous of . protecting the kine, Brahmanas, the celes- 
tials, Vedas, piety, virtue and wealth. The Lord, like the 
air, wanders in various elemental forms, but does not assume 
them in consequence of His being shorn of all qualities. O 
kin‘’g, when at the end of the past Kalpa, Brahma disappeared 
in consequence of his sleep, the earth and all other regions 
were sunk in the ocean. Hayagriva, the King of Danajvas, 
pilfered the Vedas issuing frum the mouth of Brabma whil¢ he 
was lying asleep under the influence of Kala. Being ap- 
prised of the action of Hayagtiva, the king of Danayas, 
the Lord Hari assumed the form of a fish, Then , one ete 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 83 


Toyal saint named Satyavrata, devoted to Narayana, was 
engaged in devout penances on the surface of the water. 
In this grea alpa, he became the son of Vivasvata cele- 
brated unee wee Of Sraddhadeva and was conferred 
upon by Hari th of Manu. Once on atime, while 
he was offering w n(the river) Kritamala, he obtained one 
fish from the wat§f in his palms. O’Bhiarata, Satyavarta, the 
threw into the water of the river the fish 
gether with the water. (The fisn) piteously 


Ro why dost thou throw me, terrified as I am, in the 
water, unto ¥aws acquatic animals who had s'ain my kins- 
men.” Not snowing toile Lord) had assumed the form of 
the fish for extending favour xto him, he made up his mind 
for protecting the fish, Hearing « piteous words, the king” 
stricken with pity, brought her to’ CP Mg eee S-0 aq 
filled with water. She so much grew up, in that Kamandalu, 
in one night that being desirous of releasingfherself, she said to 
the king:—“I can live in this Kamandalu with great diffi- 
culty, do thou ascertain for. me a large habitation where [ may 
live happily.” Taking it therefrqm he threw it into a big jar full 
of water ;" being thrown in it she grew ina moment into the 
dimension of three cubits. (She again said) :—‘Even in this 
water, O king, I do not live happily. -Give me spacious room 
who have sought thy shelter.’ Then, O king, taking her up he 
again threw her into a tank; she then occupying it with her 
body assumed the form of a huge fish. (She again said) :—“O 
king, even this water of the tank does not conduce to my ease ; 
resorting to some means that ] may not die before, do thou 
place me ina lake.” Being thus accosted, the king placed 
her in a deep and inexhaustible lake. And while he was about 
to throw her growing to the dimension of the lake, into the 
ocean (the fish) said :-—‘O hero, it does uot behove thee to leave - 
me here whete Makara and other acquatic animals shall devour . 
me.” Being thus puzzled by her charming speech, the king’said: ° 


’ 


84 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. ; 
“Who art thou who art infatuating me in the shape of a fish? 
I have neither seen nor heard-of the prowess of an acquatic 
animal that can, in one day, increase so hin its form 
as to occupy a tank extending ov, 
Forsooth, thou art the undecaying 


Narayana, and 
ng the creatures. 
Salutation unto thee, the foremost of P&rusha, the lord of 


incarnations are for the behoof of the creatures. 
know, for what thou hast assumed this form. Oth ing 
lotus eyes, resorting, to thine feet, who artthe friend and 
beloved soul of all, is never fruitleamtnlike that unto others 
who are proud of their bodigs since thou hast manifested 
\ unto us this-thy wondrous form.” 
~: The ingame having said this, the lord, of ths 
earth, having the form of a fish, desirous of sporting in t . 
ocean of dissolution at the end of a yuga, expressedchis 
desire; for the lord is always fond of his devoted votariec? 
THE Lorp said:—O slayer of enemies, on the seventh 
day, alter this, Bhur, Bhuva and others—all the three regions 
shall be drowned in the ocean of dissolution. O king, when 
the three worlds will be on the verge of being drowned in the 
. Ocean, a huge boat despatched by me ‘shall approach thee. 
Then taking all sorts of Oshadhis, great and small, encircled 
by the seven Rishis and with all creatures do thou get on board 
‘| the boat and thou shalt be able to roam about, without any 
difficulty. There being one ocean and all devoid of darkness, 
thou shalt have the effulgence of the Rishis; on the boat being 
shaken by the powerful wind, do thou with a huge serpent 
tie it to my horns when I shall come there. O lord,’ as 
| long as the night relating to Brahman shall last, I shall 
roam about attracting thee with the Rishis im the boat 
in that ocean of dissolution. Thou shalt (then) be able to 
comprehend, in thy mind, my glory spoken of by the Great 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 85 


BrShmana as related by me with reference to thy query.” 
Having thus instructed the king, Hari disappeared. He 
waited for the time of which Hrishikesha spoke. Spreading 
Kuga grass, with his face towards the east, the Royal saint,sat 
there meditating upon the feet of Hari assuming the form 
of a fish, Thereupon the ocean rose inundating the 
entire earth—and the dreadful clouds increasing, seemed to 
be on the point of pouring their contents. Thinking of the 
Lord's command he espied a boat approaching; taking the 
ascetics; Oshadhis and creepers, he got up on it. The ascetics, 
then delighted, said to him:—“O king, meditate upon 
Keshava ; he shall save us from this disaster and bring about 
our well-being.” Thereupon being meditated upon by the 
king, one golden fish, having a horn, and a body extend- 
ing over ten million of Yoyanas, appeared in the great ocean. 
As said before by Hari, he, fastening the boat to the horn 
with a huge serpent, delightedly chanted the agiones of the 
slayer of Madhu. 

THE KING said :—Thou art the great preceptor conferring 
emancipation, resorling to whose feet people, having themr 
selves clouded with ignorance and worn out with the toil of 
the world ‘at the root of which is ignorance,—obtain Him, 
He is ignorant and has his own work for his fetter; he 
engages in action for happiness; He is our preceptor, in 
whose service we can renounce desire for happiness and 
who snaps the fetters of the mind. May that eternal lord, who 
isthe preceptor of preceptors, be our preceptor, by serving 
whom, a person renouncing ignorance, the dirt of the mind, 
attains to his true colour, as silver being burnt by fire, 
assumes its true colour. We resort unto thee,awho art that 
Lord, a millioneth portion of whose delight the other celes- 
tials, the preceptor and great men combined, cannot ‘guive. 
Asa blind man takes another blind man as his guide,.so an 
ignorant wight selects another such as his preceptor; we, 
wishing to know thine own course elect thee as our precep- 


86 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 

tor whose knowledge is like the sun and brings in relief all 
the senses. An ordinary preceptor’ instructs’ a person in 
unreal ways, by which he attains to ignarance shard: to cross ; 
but thou art eternal and instructest ih eternal knowledge 
by which people attain to own (true) station, Thou art the 
friend of all, their beloved lord, soul, preceptor, and identical 
with their knowledge and desire; still men guided by false 
. understanding and desire, cannot perceive thee, stationed in 
their hearts. But for awakening sense in me I seek thy 
shelter, who art the foremost of the celestials, and worshipful 
lord; O lord, do thou snap the fetters of egoism with thy 
words and display thy own true form. 

The king having said this, the Divine Bime Purusha, 
sporting in the great ocean in the form of a fish, communi- 
cated unto him the truth, the celestial Purina and Samhita 
having in it Sankhya Yoga and various works and various 
secret truths‘about the self; the royal saint Satyavrata, with 
Rishis seated in the boat, Hstened to the true knowledge 
about self without any doubt, communicated by the Lord and 
Brahma. Brahma rising at the end of the first dissolution, Hari, 
slaying the Asura Hayagriva, returned unto him the Vedas; 
andthe king Satyavrata being endued with knowledge and 
discriminative knowledge by the mercy of the Vishnu became 
the Manu Vivasvata’s son at this Kalpa, Listening to this 
‘dialogue between the Royal saint Satyavrata and Vishnu 
assuming the shape of a fish by illusion, peopie are freed 
from sins. Whoever, shall sing this incarnation of the Divine 
Hari duly, shall have his desire accomplished ‘and attain to 
excellent state. I bow uato that fish of illusion, the cause 
of the universe, who, having slain the Danava who had 
pilfered the Vedas issuing “out of the mouth of the Deity 
sleeping atease in the water of the ocean of dissolution 
and lying an active, communicated them unto peeves 
and the seven Rishis. *.” 

THE END OF Book VIII. 


BOOK Ix. 


ee ene 


| ’ 
CONTENTS. 


Cuaprer 1.—How Sudyumna became a woman.—P. 1 
Cuaprer I11,—The description of the offspring of the five sons of 
Manu.—P. 4. , 
| CuartTer 1L—The, destription of the offspring of Manu's sons, 
Sarydti and others.—P. 8. 
Cuarrer 1V.—The account of Nabhaga and Anwarisha.—P. 11. 
4 Cuarter V.—The protection of Durvasa from Anwarisha.—P. 18. 
Cuarrer VI.—The description of Anwarisha’s family as well as that 
of Mandhata.—P. 21. 
Cuarrer VII.—The story of Purukutsa and Harishchandra.—P. 26. 
Cuarter VILI.—The account of Rohita’s family: the destruction of 
.-. agara’s offspring by Kapila’s curse.—P. 29. 
rye”  Cuaprer. IX—The account of, Ansuman’s family. Bhagicatha 
brings down the Ganga.—P. 33. 
Cuarrer X.—The account of Rama’s birth; Ravana’s destruction 
by him ; and his victorious return to Ayodhya.—P. 37. | 
Cuarres XI.—Rama lives in Ayodhya with his younger brothers.— 
P. 44. : 
Cuartrr XIf.—The accounts of Rama’s son Kusha, and Sasada’s 
family. —P. 48. 
Cuarter XIII.—The description of Nemi’s family; birth of Janaka, 
P. 50. 
is Cuarrer XIV.—The birth of Buddha from Vrihaspati’s wife Tara by 
Soma : the birth of Aila and Urvashi—P. 53. 
Cuarrer XV.—The birth of Gadhi and destruction of Kartavirjya.— 
1 P 58. 

Cuarrer XVI.—Destruction of Jamadaghi by Kartavirjya’s sons: 
Parashurama repeatedly slays the Kshatriyas the account of Vishwa- 
mitra’s family.—P. 62. 

Cuaprer XVII.—The account of Ayu’s family.—P. 66. 
\ Cuarrer XVIII1.—The account of Yayati, Nahusha’s son: Puru 
takes on his decrepitude.—P. 68, 


oe 


Cnavrer X|X.—Vayati attains liberation —P. 73. 

Cuarver XX.—The account of Putu’s family, and Bharata.~P. 76. 

Cuarrer XXi.—The accounts of Bhasata’s; family, Rantideva and 
Ajamida.—P. 80. : 

Cuarrer XXM.—The accounts of Jarasandha, Vudhisthiea, and 
Duryodhana, &¢.—P. 83. . ; : 

.Caarrer XXP.—The accounts of the races of Anu, Drubya, Tue- 
vasu and Vadu.—P. 87., . 

‘Cuavver XXIV.—The birth of Rama and Krislina,—P. 90. 


& 


PROSE ENGLISH TRANSLATION 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM. 


BOOK Ix. 


EDITSD AND PUBLISHED BY 
MANMATHA NATH DUTT, M.A, M.R-AS. 
Rector, KesnuB ACADEMY. 


Author of the English Translation of the Ramayana, Vishnu- 
puranam, Gita and other work, 


CALCUTTA: 
Paintee sy H. C. Dass, 
Exysium Press, 65/2 Beapon Strexv. 


irae 1896. 


BOOK IX. 


CHAPTER J. 


see AUSPICIOUS KING said :—I have heard of the 
innumerable periods of creation and destruction ‘of this 
universe) as described by thee. (I have also heard of) the 
infinite powers (grand manifestations) of Hari. I have 
heard that the holy and saintly Satyavrata, the king of 
Dravira, who gained, at the close of the past Kalpa (a divi- 
sion of the duration of the world), spiritual knowledge by 
devotion to Narayana, became Manu, the son of Vivaswata. 
I have heard from thee of the kings ; (the list being headed by) 
Ikshaku (who were all) sons of Vivaswata. O Brahman! 
describe unto us, who are always eager to hear, of the different 
families of those (kings) and their histories. Oh the supreme- 
ly Eminent! relate unto us the prowess of all the past, the 
present and the future scions of those (families). 

Tue Auspicious SuTA said :—The adorable Suka (who) 
knew the ultimate Dharma, being thus questioned by Parik- 
shit in the assembly of the worshippers of Brahma, said, 
(as follows). 

THE AUSPICIOUS SuKA said :—Oh the killer of enemies! 
hear in detail of (the history of) the progeny of Manu, which 
I am unable to describe, in detail, even in a hundred years. . 
At the end of Kalpa, there was only the Supreme Being who 
is the soul of the present and past creatures. There was 


2 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


nothing except this universe. Oh king! there appeared at 
the navel of the Supreme Being the blossom of a golden lotus 
in which was born the Self-create, four-mouthed (Brahma). 
Marichi was born from the mind of the (Brahma and) from 
the said Marichi, Kagyapa was born. From him (Kagyapa) 
and Aditi, the daughter of Daksha, (his wife) was born Vivas- 
wan. Oh Bharata! from him (Vivaswan) and Sanjna (his 
wile) was born Sradhadeva, a Manu. The said powerful, self- 
_knowing (Sradhadeva) begat on his wife Sradha ten sons. 
(They were) Ikshaku, Nriga, Sarjati, Dishta, Dhrista, Karusha 
- Narishyanta, Prishadra, Nabhaga, and Kavi. The powerful 
adorable Vashista performed a yajna (to propitiate) Mitra 
-Baruna for children to the childless Manu (when he was with- 
out any issue) before. In the (said) yajna, Sradha,; the wife 
of Manu, who was living on milk only, having gone up to the 
priest reciting mantras, prayed for (birth of) daughters. 
Clarified butter being offered uttering the syllable Bhashat, 
and being requested by Adhyurja, the priest who was reciting 
mantras, (and who was) a Brahmana, performed the yajna, 
(while) thinking (within himsclf) of that (request of Sradha). 
Owing to that dereliction (of duty on the part of) the 
priest reciting mantras, a daughter, [IA by name, was born. 
Manu _ not being much satisfied at secing her (the daughter’, 
said to the preceptor (as follows’. “Ah what pity ! Oh 
Lord! how this unexpected effect of cause (is possible) 
for you who worship the Brahma? There should not 
be such violation of mantra. You, who’ have known the 
_ Brahma, whose sins have been burnt (destroyed) by asceti- 
cism, have been engaged (to perform this yajna) and yet 
(there) has resulted this failure of expectation, like sin in 
the gods.” The adorable grandfather (Vashista) ‘hearing 
his aforesaid words, (and) perceiving the transgression on the 
part of the priest reciting the mantras, said (as follows) to the 
son of sun (7. ¢. Manu). “Owing to the transgression in your 
priest reciting the mantras, there has resulted this failure of 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM., 3 


expectation. Yet, by my own (spiritual) powers, I will make 
thee father of good son.” 

Oh king! the said adorable, glorious (Vashista) being 
thus determined, and being desirious of bestowing on 114 man- 
hood, prayed to the Eternal Being. 


The all-powerful, supreme Hari, being gratified, bestowed 
on her ([14) the wished for gift. Thereon, Ila became Sudy- 
umna, the best of human beings. 


Oh Emperor! once on a_ time, the said warrior 
(Sudyumna) protected by armour, surrounded by a few 
ministers, taking a beautiful bow and most wonderful arrows, 
and riding on a Sindh horse, was out hunting in a forest. 
(He) went northwards- while..pursuing the games. He en- 
tered the charming forest down mount Sumeru, (where) 
there was sporting the all-powerful Siva with Uma. Oh king! 
the suppressor of enemies, the said Sudyumna, found himself 
(turned into) a female, and his horse a mare, as soon as he 
entered that forest. There (in that forest) his followers began, 
with failing heart, to look at one another, at'finding their sex 
change (so suddenly). 

Tue Auspicious KING said :—Oh the adorable! why and 
from whom did that country acquire this virtue ? Having put 
this question, our curiosity (has been) greatly (raised). 


Tue Auspictous SuKA said:—Once on a time, there 
repaired, by making all directions free from tinge of darkness, 
Suvrata (and other) Rishis to see Girisha. Having seen them 
(the Rishis), Goddess Amvika (who was) naked became highly 
ashamed. Then (she) having risen from the lap of her hus- 
band covered (her) waist. Seeing them in the enjoyment of 
sexual pleasures, the Rishis returned, and went from there to 
the place of Nara Narayana. Bhagavan said this for the 
satisfaction of his wife: whoever will cross (the boundary of) 
this place, will turn into a female. Thence-forward, all male 
beings avoid that forest. She (14) too, surrounded by her) 


4 SRIMADBUAGABATAM. 


followers, travelled from one forest to another. Now, Bhaga- 
van Budha seeing her surrounded by females, desired her (for 
sexual intercourse) whe was the best of women and promenad- 
ing on the precincts of the hermitage. She, (who was very) 
handsome also wished the sen. of Somaraja (Budha, as her) 
husband. He (Budha) begat on her his son Purubarasha. Oh 
king ! (we have) heard that the said Manava Sudyumna {son 
of Manu) having gained such woman-hood, thought of 
Vashista. He (Vashista) seeing him (Sudyumna) in that 
plight and being greatly moved by kindness, worshipped San- 
kara for the manliness of Sudyumna. 

Oh the Lord of mankind! The Bkagavan (Sankara) was 
pleased (and) to preserve the truth of his words, his darling’s 
as well, said as follows. “He (Sudyumna) whe belongs to 
your Gotra (family) will (alternately) be male for one month, 
and female in another month. Let Sudyumna in this way 
‘rule over the world: at his pleasure.” By the favour of 
(his) spiritual preceptor, (Sudyumna) regained, by turns, 
sufficieat manliness, (and) rule¢ over the world.- The 
subjects (however) were npt satished with him. Oh king! 
He got three sons; Utkala, Saya, and. Vimala. (They 
were all) virtuous and kings in the Deccan. Now, in 
course of time, the powerful, Lord of cities (Sudyumna) -re- 
paired to the forest making over (the sovereignty of the) 
world te Purubarasha, his son. 


CHAPTER II. oo 


CER 


wa 


‘Lae AUSPICIOUS SUKA said :—Now Sudyumna, the son 
of Vaivaswata, having fared thus, Manu desirous of getting 


SRIMADHUAGABATAM. 5 


children, performed religious austerities on the banks of 
the Yamun& for a hundred years. Then, Manu worshipped 
all-powerful Hari for (getting) children. He got ten sons, 
Ikshaku being the first-born, all resembling him. 
Prishadhru, the son of Manu, who was made a cow-herd by © 
his preceptor, fed the cows with attention and passing the 
nights in kneeling posture. Once on a time, when it was 
raining, a tiger made into the fold. The cows that were 
lying asleep got frightened, and rising, began to run about 
in the fold. The powerful tiger attacked a cow. Being 
frightened, she began to low. Prishadhru hearing the low 
of agony of the cow followed. In that dark night when even 
the stars were eclipsed, (he) took up in a great hurry a dagger 
and believing it to be tiger, cut off, unwittingly, the head of 
acow. The tiger also being wounded by the dagger, lost 
his ear and rushed out, in great fright, leaving marks of blood 
on the way. Prishadhru, the suppressor of enemies, believed 
the tiger to have been killed ; but at the break of day found 
Babhra, a cow, to have been killed and became sorry. The 
family-priest, Vashista, cursed Prishadhru, who, committed 
sin unwittingly, as follows. ‘Be thou, on account of this act, 
not even the worst of Kshatriyas, but a Sudra. Being thus 
cursed by the preceptor, Prishadhru accepted the curse with 
folded palms. The powerful Prishadhru stopping the semen 
(i.e. living in perpetual chastity) performed the Vrata, valued 
by the Munis. By his devotion to Bhagavan Vasudeva, who 
is the universal Soul, the supreme God ‘and who is) Pure, 
Prishadhru became friendly to all created beings, isolated 
from companions, absorbed in meditation, and he gained 


‘tranquility of soul and complete isolation. (He) had _ his eyes 


restrained, would not receive anything from any body, would 
live on whatever (thing) happened to come unasked for. (And 
living in this way) he, absorbing himself in the Supreme Soul, 
became happy in having divine knowledge, and travelled 
over this carth like deaf and dumb and an inanimate being, 


6 SRIMADKIUAGABATAM. 


Muni (Prishadhru) who was thus deporting himself, having 
gone to forest, saw conflagration therein, and having cremated 
his body by that fire, obtained the supreme Brahma. Kavi, 
the youngest son of Manu, having lost desire for worldly 
enjoyments relinquished his kingdom in youth, (and) having 
tepaired to forest with his friends, gained the supreme Being. 


From (Manu), Kurusha sprang up the Kshatriyas (known as) q 


Kurusha. (They were) devoted to Brahma, religious and rulers| , 


of tle Northern Circars. From Dhrista, sprang up Kshatriyas 


(known as) Dharsta who came to be Brahmanas. on earth, . 


Sumati was son of Nriga. To him (Sumati) was born 
Bhutajyotih, to whom was born Vasu. Pratika was- son of 
Vasu ; Oghavan was his (Pratika’s) son; who (Oghavan) had 
a son, called Oghavan.and a daughter called Oghavati, whom 
Sudargana married. To Narishyanta was born Chitrasena, 
to whom was born Riksha, whose son was Meedhan. Purna 
was the son of Meedhan, and Indrasena was his (Purna’s) 
son. To Indrasena was. born Bitihotra, Satyacrava was the 
son of Bitihotra. Uragrava was the son of Satyacrava, and 
to him was born Devadatta. To him (Devadatta) Bhagavan 
Fire Himself (incarnated as his) son, and he was called Agni- 
begya, who (Agnibegya) became famous as the great sage 


Kanina Jatukarna. O king! from him (Agnibecya) sprang. 


up the race of Brahmans (known as) Agnibecyayana. The 
descendants of Narishyanta have been described by me. 
Now listen to (the description of) the descendants of Dishta. 
There was (another Nabhaga) who became Vaisya on account 
of his bad acts. His (Nabhaga’s) son was Valandhana, whose 
son was Batsapriti. Pranggu was the son of Batsapriti. 
Know Pramiti (to be) the son of Pranggu. Khanitra was the 
son of Pramiti, to whom was born Chakshusha, whose son was 
Rambha. Khaninetra was the son of Rambha, (and he was) 
virtuous. 

Oh Emperor ! king Karandhama was Khaninetra's own 
begotten son, .\bikshit was tle son of Karandhama. His 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM, 7 


(Abikshit’s) son was Marutta (who) became sovereign of the 
world, (and who was made to) perform yajna by the great 
ascetic Samwvarta, the son of Angirasa. The yajna of Marutta 
was such that no other was equal to it. Whatever (utensils) 
there were in that yajna, were all made of gold and beautiful. 
(In that yajna) Indra was pleased by drinking Soma juice ; 
the Brahmanas by gifts ; the Maruts were distributors and the 
Vigwadevas were members of the assembly. ; 

Dama was the son of Marutta,’and his.son was Rajabar- 
dhana. To him (Rajabardhana) was born Sudhriti. Nara was 
the son of Sudhriti; and his son was Kevala. To him (Kevala) 
was born Dhundhuman, whose son was Vegavan. Budha was 
the son of Vegavan. To him was born Trinavindu, who was 
aking. Devi Alambusha, the best of Apsaras, married him 
(Trinabindu), who was the abode of many adorable qualities. 
Sons were born unto them, a daughter Ilabila, as well. 

The lord of ascetics, Bigrava, having learnt the ultimate 
knowledge from his father, begat on her (Jlabila) a son named 
Dhanada. 

His sons were Vicala, Sunyabandhu, and Dhumraketu. 
King Vicala, who raised descendants, built a city (called) 
Vaicali. Hem Chandra was his son. Dhumraksha was the 
son of Hem Chandra. To his (Dhmraksha’s) son, Sanjama, 
were born Krigagwa and Devaja. To Krigagwa was born 
Somadatta who gained the best course obtainable by Yogis 
by worshipping the ultimate God of yajnas by sacrifice of 
horses (known as) Acwamedha. 

Somadatta’s son was Sumati, whose son’ was Janamejaya. 

These famous descendants of Trinabundu were rulers at 
Vaic&la. 


CHAPTER III- 


Te AUSPICIOUS SUKA said :—King Sarjati, the. son of 
Manu, was versed in the Vedas, who int the yajna performed 
by the Angirasas advised the line of action on.the second 
day of yajna. 

Sarjati had a daughter by the name of Sukanya who 
had charming eyes. He, having gone to forest with his 
daughter, went to the hermitage of Chyavaia. She (Sukanya) 
perceived a pair of luminaries resembling glow worm in the 
holes’ of an ant-hill (while) she accompanied by her maids of 
honour, was cropping plants in the forest. Then, the girl as 
if driven by fate pierced the luminaries in peurile simplicity 
with thorn. From them blood began to gush out. Forthwith 
retention of urine and foeces followed in the army. The sage 
of the kings, Sarjati seeing that became astonished and said 


unto ,them. “Have you done any wrong unto Bhargava? 


Verily some one amongst us, has defiled his hermitage.” 


Being terror-stricken, SukanyA said unto her father :—“A - 


little (offence) has been given by me: I have unwittingly pierced 
a pair of luminaries with thorn.” 

Hearing the said words of (his) daughter, Sarjati got fright- 
ened and slowly pacified the Muni who lay buried in the ant-hill. 
Having learnt his (Muni’s) desires, Sarjati gave his daughter 
in marriage with the Muni (and) got over the danger. Then 
having embraced the Muni, he returned to his capital with 
heart full of devotion. 

Sukany&, the reader of hearts, having obtained the 
wrathful Chyavana (as) her husband, pleased (her husband) by 
careful soothing (and) nursing. 

Now in course of time, the Nasattas came to the hermit- 
age of Chyavana. Worshipping them, (the Muni) said, “ Oh 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. - 9 


Gods! grant me youth. I shall offer you, who have not 
drunk soma juice, goblet-ful (of soma juice). Grant unto me 
that age and beauty which is desired by women.” 

The (divine) physicians became pleased and said, “be it so. 
Dive thou into this lake formed by the Sidhas.” 

Being thus addressed, the sage Chyabana (who was) stricken 
by age, whose skin was shrivelled and whose nerves and veins 
were prominent, plunged into the lake with Aswini-kumars. 

Then came out of the lake three beings (male) resembling 
. one another, wearing best apparel, garland of lotus, and 
Kuxdals (circlets.) 

Now, the chaste, beautiful (Sukany4) having seen them 
(who were) all alike (and) as resplendant as the sun, could 
not distinguish (who her) husband (was), (and therefore) 
took the protection of Aswini-Kumiars. 

Pleased with (her) chastity, (the Aswini-kumars) pointed 
out to her (her) husband; and embracing the ascetic (they) 
went to Heaven by the (heaven-going) charriot. 

Now, Sarjati desirous of performing yajna, went to the 
hermitage of Chyabana. (There he) saw a being resem- 
bling the sun (seated) by the side of (his) daughter. The 
king (Sarjati), not much pleased at heart, said to his daughter 
without blessing her, “what hast thou desired to do, that 
thou hast deceived thy husband, who a muni and who is 
saluted to by the people ? Oh thou unchaste ! that thou servest 
that unknown paramour, having forsaken the age-stricken, 
uninviting husband? Oh thou who belongest to a noble 
family! why is then that different predilection which has 
brought this stain on the family ? Shameless, thou harbourest 
this paramour! Thou hast thrown the family of thy hus- 
band, thy father’s as well, into hell !” 

Pure at heart (and) proud of her chastity, she said unto her 
father who was thus addressing her. ‘Oh father! This is the 
son of Bhrigu, thy son-in-law.” Then she narrated to (her) 
father the whole (story of) how he acquired youth and beauty. 

B 


10 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


The king being astonished and highly glad, embraced (his): 
daughter. 
Chyabana performed yajna for the warrior (Sarjati) with 
Soma-juice, and by his own powers made Aswini-kumars 
-accept goblets full of Soma-juice, even though (they were) not 
entitled to drink Soma-juice. 


Angry (Indra whose wrath) was excited at that injustice, 
took up the thunderbolt to kill him (Chyabana). Bhargava 
paralised the hand of Indra (armed) with thunderbolt. 


Thenceforward, all (the gods) agreed to the offer of 
Soma-juice to Aswini-kumars (who were) as divine physicians, 
excluded (from the enjoyment of) Some-juice at the yajnas. 


Oh the suppressor of enemies! Sarjiti had three sons 
(by the name of) Uttanabarhi, Anarta and Bhurisena. To 
Anarta was born Rebata. (Rebata) having set up a city (known 
as) Kugasthali in the bed of ocean, lived therein and ruled 
over countries called Anartas. He had a hundred qualified 
sons (of whom) Kukudmi was the eldest. Taking his daughter, 
(he) went to Brahma in the Brahmaloka (which is) free from 
passions and ignorance, for a bride-groom for his daughter. 
The Gandharvas being engaged in rolling out exquisite music 
(Kukudmi) did not get any opportunity (to broach the subject) 
and waited a while; theg, having made obesience to Brahma 
spoke out his mind. 


Having heard that Brahma said smiling to him, “Oh king ! 
death has removed those whom you have on mind (2.e., selected). 
The sons, grandsons, even their descendants are not now heard 
of. Twenty seven yugas of time years have passed by. Oh 
king ! go then, therefore, to Baladeva of great strength, and 
who is a manifestation of the God of gods; give your gem of 
a daughter in marriage to that best of man. Bhagaw4n Hari, 
the supporter of the Universe, the chanting and hearing of 
whose name is meritorious has, for the destruction of ‘the 
weight of sin of the earth, incarnated a portion of His self” 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. ¥L 


Being thus directed, Kukudmi saluted Brahma, and giving 
his beautiful daughter in marriage to powerful Balabhadra, 
returned to his capital which was abandoned by his brothers 
on account of the terror of Yaksha. 


. 


CHAPTER IV. 


ed 


Tue AUSPICIOUS SUKA said :—Nabhgaga was the son of 
Nabhiga. His brothers allotted to him who was young- 
est, learned, ascetic and come from the house of spiritual pre- 
ceptor, maintenance of his father as a share of ancestral pro- 
perty. “Oh brothers! what have you allotted as my portion ?” 
said Nabhiga. : 

“Our father has been determind as your portion.” 

“Oh father ! why have my brothers made thee my portion ?” 
said Nabaga, “Oh my little child,” the father replied, “do not 
place any reliance in that. The Angirashas are performing 
yajna. Receiving by turns, business in the yajna on the sixth 
day, they are, although meritorious, making blunders today in 
yajna business. Oh the learned, read you to those great per- 
sonages two hymns about Vaisyadeva. They, who will be 
going to Heaven, will give unto you the remainders of their 
wealth in the yajna. Go you, therefore, to those (ascetics), 
He (Nabhaga) did as he was directed to do. They (the Angir- 
ashas) went (to Heaven) giving over to him the remainders of 
their yajna wealth. 

When (Nabhaga) was going to take (the yajna wealth) a 
dark-looking person proceding from the north said unto him. 
“ This wealth on the sacrificial ground belongs to me.” 


12 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


At this, (Nabhiga) the son of Manu said :—“All this has 
been given unto me by the Rishis.” 

(In this quarrel between us,) let your father be questioned. 
Thereat Nabhaga asked his (father). (His) father said, “In 
certain yajna, the Rishis allotted to Rudra all the wealth 
brought to the sacrificial ground. The said Deva (Rudra) 
takes the whole (from that). 

Saluting him (Rudra) Nabhaga said, “Oh God! wealth on 
the sacrificial ground is your portion. Oh Brahman, this has 
been said by my father. (Therfore) I please thee by (bending) 
my head. 

As thy father has given honest (opinion) and thou. also 
tellest the truth, (and) thou art learned in .the Vedas, I give 
unto you the knowledge of the eternal Brahma. Take this 
wealth, the remainder of yajna, which is given by me to you. 
Having said this Bhagawan Rudra, the protector of the virtu- 
ous vanished. 

He who meditates on this with earnestness in the morning 
and evening, becomes learned and versed in the Vedas and 
(gets) his own salvation. 

Ambarisha was the son of Nabhaga. The curse of Brahma 
which is never unavailing could not affect him, for Ambarisha 
was virtuous and deeply devoted to Bhagawan. 

THE Auspicious KING said :—Oh Bhagawan ! I am desirous 
of hearing the character of that wise ascetic king (Ambarisha) 
whom the curse of Brahma which is impossible to overcome, 
could not affect. - 

THE AuSPICIOUS SUKA said:—The eminently virtuous 
Ambarisha having obtained the earth consisting of seven 
islands, hoard of treasures (and) eternal blessing, considered 
all that (which is) difficult to attain by men (in general) as 
(unsubstantial) objects in dream ; because people (even) know- 
ing the perishableness of (earthly) riches, get plunged into 
delusion (at the loss of wealth). (He) became greatly devoted 
to Bhagawan Basudeva and His virtuous worshippers, by 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM,, 13 


which (devotion) he considered this universe (as worthless as) 
pebbles. He got his mind absorbed into the lotus feet of 
Krishna, (he engaged) his words in chanting the praise of 
Narayana; his hands in sweeping the temple of Hari; his 
ears in listening to the praise of Achyuta (Narayana) ; his eyes 
in observing the shrines containing the Lingum (image) of 
Mukunda; his limbs in touching the body of the servants 
of Mukunda; his sense of smell in taking the smell of 7udasz 
(dedicated to) His lotus feet; his feet in following in the 
wake of Hari; his head in saluting to the feet of Hrishikesh. 
(He used) the garlands, sandals and other things (not led 
by) desire of enjoyment, but as the enjoyment of devotion 
of the virtuous. Having dedicated all (his) acts to (the 
service of) Bhagawan Adhakshaja, (he) ruled over this world 
at the direction of the Brahmans devoted to Him. 


The said (king Ambarisha) worshipped God, the Lord of 
yajnas, on the banks of the Saraswati in Dhannya (country) 
by Aswamedha (performed by) Munis (headed) by Vagishta, 
Ashita and Gotama; the ‘donations and minutiz of which 
(yajna) were performed ata great cost. In this yajna, the 
assistants at sacrifice and the family chaplains, clad in 
gorgious clothes, appeared equally -beautiful with the Gods. 
His subjects hearing and chanting the praise of virtue- 
emanating (God) did not wish for Heaven, the favourite 
region of the Gods. For, the enjoyments (resulting from) 
wealths (which are) difficult of attainment, and one’s own 
kingdom, cannot enthral (the heart of) the emancipated who 


see Mukunda (God) in their (inner) heart. 


The said king having by such devotion, asceticism and 
virtues, served Hari, gradually abnegated (himself) from all 
(earthly) enjoyments. ‘ (He) restrained (his) inclinations rom 
houses, wives, children, friends, the best of elephants, 
charriots, horses, inexhaustible gems, ornaments, garments, 
and unlimited treasures. 


14 . SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


The warrior (king) co-operated by (his) queen (who 
was of) the same character, obseryed, for a year, the austerity 
(known as) Dwadashi to worship Krishna. Once, at the close 
of the austerity, in the mouth of Kartik having fasted for 
three days, and bathing in the Kalinda, (he) worshipped 
Hari in the (forest known as) Madhuvan. (Then he) de- 
votedly worshipped Keshava and the virtuous Brahmans (who 
were) emancipated, with dress, ornaments, sweet-smelling 
garlands, other presents complete with all requisites, observing 
the rules of great (religious) ablutions and with heart absorbed 
in Him. (Then the said king) sent (as present) to the ascetic 
Brahmans at (their) home sixty millions of cows having horns 
encased with gold and hoofs with silver, covered over with 
precious cloth, affording (large quantity of) milk, accompanied 
by beautiful calves (and which were) mild and young. 

Having first fed the twice-born (with) ‘delicious, rich 
rice and being directed by (Brahmans) whose desires were 
gratified, (the king) made preparations to break (his fast). At 
that time, Durb&sha (Muni) the very image of Bhagaw4n,became 
his guest. The king rising from (his) seat, greeted the guest 
with seat and (other) articles of worship. (Then) coming up 
to his feet, (the king) prayed to him to take (his) food (there). 

Accepting the prayer of the virtuous (king), he went to 
perform the necessary (mid-day religious rites) and meditating 
on the Brahma dived into the holy waters of Kalinda. 

(There) remaining only half a moment of Dwé&dagi to 
expire, the king (who was) conversant with Dharma began to 
consider, at that “religious crisis, (the question of) breaking 
the fast with the twice-born. (There is) sin in transgressing 
a Brahman, (as there is sin in)‘ not breaking the fast at 
Dwaidagi. (Tell me, Oh Brahmana !) by doing what good may 
betide me and sin may not touch me. 

Therefore break the fast at (this) austerity with water 
alone, the Brahmas said. The Brahmans consider drinking 
(as) taking food (just as they consider) it fasting. , 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 15 


Oh the best of Kurus! the said ascetic king, (no sooner 
did he) drink water thus meditating in his heart the Narayana, 
(than) he saw the Brahman coming. 

Durbasha (who had) performed the necessary prayers, 
having come from the bank of the Jamun, and being saluted 
by the king, became aware of his (king’s) acts by meditation. 
Shaking in anger, frowning, and with roughest of face 
(Durbasha whose) ‘appetite was indomitable, spoke to the 
king (standing) with folded palms. 

Ah! observe the defiance to Dharma (made) by the cruel 
(king) who has been maddened by wealth, who is not devoted 
to Vishnu, and who believes himself to be God ; who (the 
king) has taken (his) meal without feeding me who came 
(and who was) invited (to be guest). Forthwith will (I) 
shew the result (of thy misdeed). Having said this, being 
inflamed with anger and tearing off (his) matted hair, he 
to kill him (the king) made a discus as (horrible as) the 
fire of distruction. : 

The king did not stir from the place (though he) saw her 
(the discus) come towards the earth, dagger in hands, blazing 
(and) shaking (the earth). As fire burns the angry serpent 
(so) the mace sent by the Universal Soul for the protection 
of (His) servant burnt the Xritya. 

Durbasha seeing that (mace) proceed on, and his own 
efforts baffled, got frightened (and) fled in all directions for 
the safety of his soul. The blazing discus of Vagaw4n pursued 
him (the Muni) as conflaragation in the forest (pursues) 
the serpents. Muni (Durbasha) perceiving the mace close 
behind ran (in the direction of) the Sumeru (mountain) to 
enter (its) caves. (Thus) he went to all sky, earth, caves, 
oceans, the worlds with the divinities protecting the regions 
(and) the Heaven. (But) wherever (he) went, there (he) 
saw the unbearable Sudarshana (the discus of Krishna). 
When he could get protection no where (became) terrified in 
mind and desirous of taking protection, sought (the protec- 


16 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


tion) of God Birinchi (by saying). “ Save me, Oh the creator ! 
Oh the self-created ! whose power is infinite.” 

THE AUSPICIOUS BRAHMA said :—At the close of Whose 
(mystereous) play (treative energy) at the time known as 
Deviparardhaka (a number equal to the full term of Brahma’s 
life) at the very winking of His eyes (who is) the soul of 
destruction (and who) intends to burn (the creation) this my 
region together with the universe will disappear. Myself, 
Bhaba, Daksha, Bhrigu and others; Prajesha, Bhutesha, 
Suresha and other gods all having been’entrusted with laws 
for the well-being of mankind carry out (these laws). 

Durbasha, thus pursued’ by the discus of Vishnu, (and) 
being refused by Birinchi, sought the protection of Sarba, 
who dwells on the Kailasha. 

THE AUSPICIOUS SANKARA said:—QOh child! we are 
powerless over that great, ultimate Being (in whom and 
by whose desire) this universe containing the Self-create and 
like other Beings, and thousands other (such universes) will 
in time come to exist and get destroyed ; wherein we all travel 
(in the course of the transmigration of our soul). Myself, 
Sanatkumars, Narada, Bhagawan Self-create, Kapila, Devala 
whose mental darkness has vanished, Dharma, Ashuri, 
Maricha and such others who have been emancipated (and) 
who are omniscient, do not being enveloped by illusion, know 
the illusions (caused by Him.) This weapon (discus) of the 
said Lord of the universe is truly unbearable for us. Seek 
thou His protection (and) Hari will bless thee. 

Then, Durbasha getting disappointed went to the region 
of Bhagawan known as Baikuntha, wherein dwells Srinivasha 
with Lakshmi. Being burnt by the insuppressible fire of the 
discus, falling with trembling limbs to His feet, (he said) 
plaintively, “Oh Self-create! Oh the Eternal! Oh the Best- 
intentioned ! Oh the Giver of the desired! Oh the Ruler of 
the Universe! protect me who has committed sin. I who 
did not know thy infinite power, have offended thy devotee. 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 7 


Othe Creator of the universe! the taking of whose name 
gives salvation unto the sinners in hell, wipe away that (sin 
of mine.) 
THE auspicious BHAGABAT said:—O the twice-Born | 
I am sold to thosé devoted to mé (and consequent- 
ly) dependent; and my heatt has been taken pos- 
session of by the good ahd the devotees. I am béloved 
of thosé devoted to mé. O the Brahman! I do not love 
thy (own) soul or the extremély beloved Lakshmi (so much 
as I love) those devoted to me and (are) good, to whom I am 
salvation: How can I abandon those (devotees and the good) 
who, having rehouiized (their) wife, house, children, relations, 
(theif owii) souls aiid wealth, have become devoted to ine, 
who am thus absolute? The virtuotis whose hearts are fasten- 
ed unto itie, (and who are) indifferent (to pleasure and pdin) 
have enthralled hie, as a good wife (binds and enthrals) & good 
husband. (Those who have beconie) perféet by devotion to me, 
dé not desire the four (different aspects of final emancipa- 
tion) such as contiguity &c (which all are) purchased by (them) 
by serving me, what (possibility is there of their desiring) 
thén other (riches) Which will be destroyed in time? The 
virtuous are (identical with) my heart and I am the heart of 
the virtuous. The virtuous do hot know anything beside ime, 
(nor) do I ktiow a particlé apart from them. Forthwith go 
thou then to (séék the protection of) the Being from whom 
did spring, this thine envy. Dost thou not know, that thé 
Energy (meant 0) injure the virtuous, brings evil unto the 
actor? (Truly) asceticism and knowledge are both for the 
emancipation of the Brahmans, (but then) they (asceticism 
aud knowledge) producé coritrary result (when handled by) 
imprudent agents. Oh Brahnian'! go thou therefore, (hénce}. 
May good (betide) ‘thee: Maké the highly blessed’ king 
(Ambérisha) the son of Nabh&ga, pardon (thee).. Then wilf 
peace follow (thee. 
ecw “em Ommwe 4 


Cc 


CHAPTER V.. 


ees 


4 ie AUSPICIOUS SUKA said :—Durbashi thus persecuted 
by the discus, and directed by Bhagabat, went unto Ambarisha 
(and held his feet) with great sorrow. 

He (Ambarisha) finding him (Durbasha) thus supplicate 
and touch his feet, felt ashamed (and) being very much affected 
with kindness, worshipped the said discus of Hari (in the 
following strain). 

(O discus!) thou art fire, (thou art) the adorable sun, thou 
(art) Moon, the lord of stars ; thou (art) water; thou (art) earth ; 
(thou art) the ethereal space ; (thou art) air; (thou art) the 
object that can be perceived through the senses. 


O Sudarshana! I salute thee. O the  thousand-divi- 


sioned! O the favourite of the Vishnu! O the destroyer 
of all weapons! O the Lord of the world! order blessings 
unto the Brahman. Thou art Dharma; thou art the nectar; 
thou art the truth; thou art yajna; thou art the consumer of 
all the yajnas; thou art the supporter of the creation; thou 
art the universal soul ; thou art the (ultimate) energy ; thou art 
the ultimate Being. 


O the beautiful navelled! O the bridge (protector) .of. 


all the Dharmas! O the destroyer of the Asuras, the perpe- 


trators of sins! O the supporter of the ‘three worlds! O. 


the (possessor of) the purest brightness! O Thee having 
as rapid speed ag the mind! O the performer of the most 
wonderful acts! I salute thee. Darkness is killed by thy 
Dharma-begirt brilliancy, (by which) the vision of the noble- 


minded gets’ clear. O the Lord: of the’ voice! thy glory is- 


eternal, and the transient are all thy manifestations. 


~- © the invincible (discus)! whilst thou, being hurled by 


Anjana: and. entering .the army of the Daityas and Danavas, 


incessantly cuttest off the arms, abdomens,.thighs, legs, head. 


and face (of the army), thou-appearest brilliant in battle. 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 19 


O the protector of the Universe! Thou art (the essence 
of) patience, and thou hast there been engaged by the Holder 
of man, for the destruction of the wicked. For the blessing 
of our race, do thou (this) good unto the Brahmana, which is 
doing favour to us. If the gift (made by us) is rightly done, 
or if we have properly observed our own duties, or if our race 
has (emanated from) Brahmana, then may the twice-born 
(Durbash4) get rid of (all) dangers. If the absolute Bhagabat, 
the possessor of all the attributes, (has been) gratified by 
us (on account of our) self-consciousness in all created things, 
(then ) may the twice-born (Durbasha) get rid of (all) 
dangers, 

THE Auspicious SUKA said :—Sudarshana, the discus of 
Vishnu (which was) burning the Brahmana, being thus worship- 
ped by the king (Ambarisha), became, at the desire of the - 
king, pacified in every way. . 

The said Durbasha being relieved of the heat from the 
fire of the discus, became then peaceful; and bestowing bless- 
ings (good wishes on the king) praised the said lord of the 
worlds (Ambarisha). 

Durbiasha said:—Ah! I] have observed to-day, Oh king! 
the glory of the servants of the infinite (Hari), in as much as 
(thou hast) striven for the blessing of me, the sinner ; or what 
is difficult of doing or sacrificing for the magnanimous and 
virtuous, who have gained (by their devotion) Hari, the Lord 
of the peaceful ? What remains (to be done) by the servants of 
Him, the very sound of whose name (makes) people sinless 
and pure (as) holy places. 


O King! I have been favoured by thee, who art ex- 
ceedingly kind-hearted, in as much as, disregarding my sins 
(thou. hast) saved my life. 

The king (Ambarisha) fasting for (the purpose of await- 
ing) the return (of the Muni) fed him, having ious him 
holding his feet, oe a a 


20 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


The.said Durbashi having taken the eatables. capable of 
gratifying all. desires, (which were) brought with (great) care, 
and being (thus satisfied), said to the king with great caress: 
“Take your food, I have, been pleased and favoured-by, 
thine hospitality which has, by interview, touch, and inter-, 
course with thee, the devotee to Vagabat, given me knows. 
ledge.of the Ego.. The divine females will ,incessantly.sing this. 
thy noble act, the world will praise this greatly. virtuous, 
deed: 

THE AUSPICIOUS SUKA said-:—The (highly) gratified-Dur- 
bash4 thus embracing and addressing-the king, went through 
the ethereal space, to the division of the Universe known.as) 
Brahmaloka, where (there) is no dry reasoning. 

The Muni being, gone, the king, (Ambarisha) desirous, 
of getting his (the Muni’s): interview, lived on water (only) for:: 
a year, till he returned. 


Now, on the. return of :Durbasha, the said- Ambirisha.ate 
the remnant.of food taken by the Brahmans, (which was conse-.. 
quently) holy, Having observed the offence and the relief. 
(from that), of the Muni, (Ambarisha) thought, in his.mind, of7 
his own power.and the, power of the infinite (Hari). | 


Thus said, King (Ambarisha), the possessor of.so. many of - 
such, qualities, and performed (his) devotion.to, Vagabat Vasu- 
deva the Universal soul, by deeds and rites, in consequence of 
which (devotion) he considered (enjoyment apart: from) the. 
Birinchi (Hari), things of hell, 

THE auspicious SUKA said :—Now, the judicious Amba- 
risha gave over the sovereignty to (his) son, (who was) of the- 
same character; and ;being) freed; from the, current of ‘the 
three qualities incident, to the state of humanity, he repaired. to. 
the forest, to concentrate his mind in Vasudeva, the Supreme,.. 
universal soul.. " 

People.get devoted to. Bhaganat by chanting. and meditav.. 
ting on, this virtue-producing story of King Ambarisha. | 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 2T 


: Those (human beings) who listen to the history of the 
noble-minded Ambarisha, get emancipation by devotion to 
Vishnu. 


CHAPTER VI. 


RED 


(eee SuKA: said:-—Birupa, Ketuman and 
Sambhu (were) the three sons of Ambarisha. To. Birupa. was. 
born Prishadagwa, whose son was Rathitara. 

Angira, being prayed to for children, begat on the wife of 
Rathitara, (who: was). childless,. sons: full of the . spirit of 
Brahma. 

These sons, begotten on: the field (wife) of Ambarisha, 
were known as Angirasha. ‘ (They) belonged. to the clan oft 
Rathitara. (and: were known as being) of two-fold caste (and) 
begotten on the. field:(z. e. another's wife). 

A. son, Ikshaku, was born. from the nostril of Manu (while- 
he) was sneezing. Hé had one hundred sons. (Of these). 
Bikukshi, Nimi and Dandaka (were) the principal: O kingt 
of these (hundred sons), twenty-five: became rulers of 
different countries in the front portion of Aryyavartta; in 
the, last portion, (another) twenty-five sons became’ kings. 
Three sons became kings in the middle (portion). Other (sons) 
became rulers in other places. . 

- Once.-on: a time, the said Ikshaku (at a) Sradha (called) 
Ashtaka, thus ordered (his).1son, “O Bikukshi!* go. at once: 
(and) bring me:holy.meat.” 

The said warrior (Bikukshi),, having gone (by: saying) 
4 Be itso” “to the forest,’ killed deer necessary: for- the: rite, 
{and : got}: fatigued : and -hungry; (and) unwittingly ate a-hare: 


22 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


The remainder (game) he presented unto (his) father. His 
(Ikshaku’s) preceptor, requested by him (king), to consecrate: 
(the meat), said “This meat is vitiated (and consquently) 
useless.” 

Having known the said act (as that of his) son, on being 
told by the preceptor, the king (Ikshaku) (out of) anger 
banished (his) son from the country, (for his that) violation of 
rite. 

The said Ikshaku discussed religious (subjects) with the 
preceptor Brahmana, (and) the said ascetic giving up (this 
perishable) body, obtained what is eternal. 

Bikukshi, after (his) father was dead, returned (and) ruled . 
this world. Having worshipped Hari by yajnas, (he) pecans 
famous as Sacada. 

His son, Puranjaya, was called Indra-Baha as well as 
Kakutstha. Listen to the acts (by which he acquired those) 
names. 

The Gods had an all-destroying battle with the Danavids. 
The warrior (Puranjaya) was appointed by the Gods to help 
(them), who were being defeated by the Daityas. Indra, at the 
direction of the all-powerful Vishnu, the God of the Gods, 
and the soul of the Universe, assumed (the figure of a) 
great bull to be the vehicle of him (Puranjaya). He, pro- 
tected by armour, holding divine bow, sharp arrows, seated on 
the -hump of the bull (was) being praised by (the gods). 
Being supported by Vishnu the ultimate Being, (Puranjaya) 
besieged the western portion of the city of the Daityas by — 
the Gods. (There) was a fierce battle between him and them. 
In the battle, (Puranjaya stationed at) the van (of it), sent 
the Daityas to the region of death by his spikes.’ The 
Daityas being wounded (and) fleeing from the flight of arrows, 
terrible as the fire at the end of time, (darted by) him, fled 
to their own home in, the antipodes. 

- The’ said ascetic king, having conquered the city (of the 
Daityas) with all (their: wealth and females, made (them)-over to 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. “33 


the holder of the thunder; (and) for this reason (he) is known 
by the name (of Puranjaya). 

Anena was born to Puranjaya. Prithu was his (Anena’s) 
son; to him (Prithu) was born Bigwagandhi, (and) to him 
was born Chandra; (and) his son was Yubana¢wa, (and) 
to him was born Srabasta, by whom was built the city (known 
as) Sribasti. Vrihadagwa was the son of Srabasta; to whom 
was born Kubalayagwka. : 

The powerful (Kubalagwaka), for the gratification of 
Utanka, being surrounded by twenty-one-thousand of (his) 
sons, killed the Asura called Dhundu. (For this reason) al] 
his sons are famous as Dhundumara. (But) they were burnt 
by the fire (bulging out from) the mouth of Dhundu. Three 
(of the sons) remained. Oh Bharata! (those three sons were) 
Drirhagwa, Kapitagwa, (and) Bhadragwa. Haryyagwa (was) 
the son Drirhagwa, whose son was known as Nikumbha. 

Bahulagwa (was) the son of Nikumbha; to him was born 
Krigagwa, whose son was Senajit. Yubanagwa was his 
(Senajit’s) son, who (being) childless repaired to forest. 
(Though followed by) a hundred wives, (Yubanagwa) was 
gloomy (being childless). Taking pity on him, those ascetics: 
began (to perform) a yajna in honour of Indra with great 
concentration of mind. 

The king (Yuban3¢wa) feeling thirsty entered the yajna 
room at night. Finding the Brahmanas asleep, he himself 
drank off ‘the consecrated water. 

O Lord! being awake, they (the ascetics), coming to 
know that the jar (was) empty, asked whose act it was, who 
had drunk the water (meant) to beget offspring. Knowing 
that the king, directed by God, had drunk (the holy water), 
they saluted the God (by saying) “Ah! the decree of fate is 
supreme.”. 

. Then, when. the time was full, a son, (possessing the 
marks of) the sovereign of. the world, was born (by) bursting” 
forth. thé- right: pelvic region of Yubanacwa.’ The said baby‘ 


24 SRIMADBHAGABATAM.. 


began to cry very much, for sucking the’ breast. {The priests 
saying) “Whom will it suck’? Indra (said) “child ! don’t cry, 
suck me,” (and) saying (this) held out (his) index finger. 

His (Mandhiata’s) father (Yubanacwa) did not, on account 
of the grace of the gods and Brahmans, die: Now, Yubanagwa 
obtained emancipation (of his soul) at the very place, by 
asceticism. : 

O king! (because) plunderers such as Ravana (who 
were) anxious and afraid of him (Mandhats), Indra gave him 
the name of Trashadashya. 7 

Now, the powerful sovereign Miandhata, the son of Yuba- 
nacwa, ruled with unmitigated vigour the earth consisting 
of seven islands. (Mandhata) having <self-introspection, 
worshipped, in yajnas, the Lord of the Yajnas (who is) the 
universal soul, imperceptible by the senses and the God of thé 
gods, with profuse presents; (the Lord of Yajnas being) re- 
presented by objects, mantras, system, yajna, the performer 
of the yajna, the priest, Dkarma, space and time. The whole 
of the land (on which the sun shines), from when the sun 
rises to when he sets, is called the land of Mandhata, the son 
of Yabanicwa. 

. King (Mandhata) begat. on Bindumati, the daughter 
Sacabindu, Purukutsa, Ambarisha, and Muchukundu the 
ascetic. Their (those sons’) fifty sisters accepted. Saubhari 
(as their). husband. 

Deep down into the waters of the Jamun’, practising the 
supreme asceticism, Brahmana (Saubhariy having observed 
the pleasures of the king of. the fishes (when) engaged in 
the. acts of coition, (became) fired. with: passion (and). begged 
a, daughter (for marriage). of king (Mandhat3). He (Mandhata) 
also said “Q. Brahmana ! in the assembly for the public choice 
of a husband, (my) daughter will select the desired (husband.) ,, 

(Saubhari thought that the king) considéring’ me undesir- 
able. hy: the: females. (on account ofi being) eld, of shrivelfed- 
skiix,, grey-headed, of shaking nerves and unacceptible. to the 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 25 


females, I have been denied (the prayer) : I shall render myself 
desirable to the divine females, not to speak of the females 
of the lords of human beings. The powerful (Saubhari) 
(became) thus determined. ; 

. Being (once) ushered into the harem full of wealth, by the 
sentinel, the Muni (Saubhari) was accepted (as) hushand 
‘by the fifty daughters of (MAndhata). The heart (of the’ 
king’s daughters) being conquered by him, (and each of them 
thinking) “ he is a like husband for me, and not for any of the 
others,” (and they) forgetting, for him, all (sisterly) affection, 
(there) arose a great quarrel amongst them. 

The said (Saubhari) master of powerful maxtras, being 
possessed of precious beddings, carpets, dresses, ornaments, 
decorations, (charming) toilet requisites, garlands (and being) 
clad in the most precious dresses, began to enjoy (life) in 
the houses (made lively) by males and females wearing pre- 
cious ornaments, (and full of) singing birds, bees, and pane- 
gyrists ; (and enjoyed life) in the tanks of crystal waters 
surrounded by various pleasure gardens. 

MAandhat, the lord of the world consisting of seven islands, 
having observed his (Saubhari’s) household (pomp), got as- 
tonished (and) gave up all pride, even though (he was) pos- 
sessed of all the marks of sovereignty. 

Living in such houses (of grandeur) and enjoying (his) posses- 
sions with so many pleasures, (Saubhari) did not feel content- 
ed, as fire does not, (get satisfied) with drops of clarified butter. 

Once on atime, he (Saubhari) the preceptor of mantras, 
became conscious of his ascetic degeneration consequent on 
his observation of the sexual pleasures of the fishes. 

‘Ah! observe the ruin of myself (who once) kept to the 
ways of the wise! I have destroyed (my) knowledge of the 
Eternal purchased at great cost, (by observing) the coition, 
deep down into the waters, of the inhabitants of water. 

Those desirious of the emancipation (of soul) should for- 
sake the company of the married couple; should, by all 

bD° 


26 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


endeavours, restrain’ the out-going inclination of the soul, 
should concentrate their souls in thé infinite God alone, in 
solitude ; if (at all) any company (is to be kept, then it must be) 
that of the sages devoted to God. Now, I was an ascetic, 
without any companion, deep into the waters; (then) the 
company of the fishes (resultéd in my kaving) fifty (wives,) 
then five thousand. (Yet) I, who had his mind in both (this 
world and the next), have not reached the end (of content- 
ment). 1, whose mind was: eclipsed by the Hlusions, have 
(looked for the eternal truth in the (transient) objects.’ 

(Saubhari) having passed some time in the house, felt 
disinclination (to all enjoyments) and accepting the Nyédsa,. 
repaired to forest. His wives (who looked upon their) hus- 
band (as their) Ged, followed (him). There (in the forest, 
Saubhari) having knowledge of the Zgo, practised rigorous 
asceticism (capable of) giving (perfect) knowledge of the Zgo; 
(and) giving up (his body) into the fire, got himself merged into 
the Eternal Soul. : 

O Emperor! they (his wives) having witnessed the final 
emancipation of the soul of their husband, followed him by virtue 
of his powers, (as) flame (subsides with) the extinguished fire. 


-CBHAPTER VIL 


i meme 
7 


Tee AUSPICIOUS SUKA said :—The best of Mandhata’s 
sons, who is famous (as) Ambarisha, was adopted as (his son) 
by (his) grandfather. His son was Jubanacgwa. His son 
_was Hirita. These (three) were the most famous (among) 
the descendants of Mandhata. 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 27 


Narmada, who was given (in marriage) by (her) brothers, 
the serpents, to Purukutsa, being commissioned by the king 
of the serpents, led (Purukutsa), to the antipodes. 


There (in the antipodes) he (Purukutsa), possessed of the 
spirit of Vishnu, killed (such) Gandharvas (as were) fit to be 
killed.. (So, he) got (this)’favour from the serpent (king) that, 
he who will recollect this (history), will get rid of the fear from 
Serpents. 

Trashadaswoo was the son of Purukutsa, who (Trasha- 
daswoo) was the father of Anaranya. His son was Harjyacgwa 
and to him was born Prasuna; and to him was born Triban- 
dhana. His son was known as Triganku, (and he was) truth- 
tul. (He) became Chanda! by the curse of (his) preceptor, 
but was transmitted to Heaven with his (whole) body by 
virtue of the powers of Kaugika, and is still seen in the firma- 
ment. (He was) going to be thrown headlong down by the 
Gods, (but) was forcibly resisted by (Vigwamitra). 

Harischandra (was the) son of Triganku, for whose ‘sake 
‘Vicwamitra and Vasishta, in the form of birds, had war for 
many years. 

The childless (and therefore) gloomy (Harischandra) 
being advised by Narada, sought the protection of Varuna by 
praying (as follows)’ O,the powerfpl ! let son be born unto 
me. QO emperor! if a powerful (son be born unto me) I will 
perform Yajna by (sacrificing) that (son). 

“ Be it so” (having been said) by Varuna, a son (called) 
Rohita was born unto him. He (Varuna) said, “Oh king” “a 
son has been born, worship me by that son.” (The king rep- 
lied) “when the child will be ten days old it will be holy” 
Ten days being over, he (Varuna) coming there said “worship 
me.” 

He (the king) said “the chili will be holy after dentition. 
He (Varuna) appeared and said “the teething is over, now 


worship me.” 


28 C SRIMADBHAGABATAM: y 


(The king said) “the child will be holy when the teeth will 
fall off.” He (Vacuna) said “the teeth of the child have 
fallen, worship me.’ 

_ (The king said) “the child will be holy when its teeth have 
grown again. 

He (Warane) said “ worsidp me (now that) the teeth have 
grown again.” 

He (Harischardra) said, “O king! the child of a Kshatriya 
gets holy when it can use the shield.” 

His heart being thus overpowered by affection for (his) 
son, (Harischandra) deceived him from time to time and the 
said God (Varuna) waited all that time. 

Rohita having come to know the desire of (his) father, 
repaired to forest with bow in his hand to save his life. 
Rohita having heard (that) his father had, being possessed 
by Varuna, got his belly enlarged, desired to re-enter the 
city, (but) was prevented by Indra. 

Indra directed Rohita to travel in the holy places by visit- 
ing the. shrines, (and) he thus passed a year in the forest. 
Thus, in the second, third, fourth and fifth years, Indra ap- 
pearing (in the form of an) old Brahmana prevented him 
(Rohita) in the same way (from entering the city), 

Rohita, having passed the sixth year in the forest, arrived 
at the city (and) purchased the second son of Ajeegarta, (and) 
saluted (his) father by presenting’ Sunacefa (who was meant 
for) the sacrifice. 

Then, the well-known, and famous Harischandra worshipped 

. Varuna and other Gods at Yajna by sacrificing human beings, 
(and thereby) got relieved of the (enlargement of) abdomen. 

-In that Yajna, Vicwamitra was the high-priest, (and). Yamad- 
agni who had known the Ego, became Adhyurjya, (and) Vas- 
hista, Bramha, Ayasyas had to chant verses from the Vedas. 

Indra being gratified présented unto him (Harischaidra). 
a golden charriot. The glories of Sunacefa will be recited 
hereafter. 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 29 


Vigwamitra observing the truthfulness, worthiness, and 
patience of him and his wife became highly pleased (and) 
imparted unto him the ultimate knowledge. 

(The said Harischandra) merged his mind into earth, ‘the 
earth into water, (then) the water into energy (and then that) 
energy into force, and the force into the space, and the space 
into the Ego, and then the Zgo into the universal soul. Medi- 
tating on the universal soul, as the fountain of knowledge, 
(and) destroying the ignorance by that meditation, (and) 
severing himself. from the fetters (of illusion) by the charm of 
Nirvéna happiness, (the said Harischandra) remained in the 
natural character of the Zo, free.from thoughts and desires. 


CHAPTER VIII. 


Hinks was the son of Rohita, his son was Champa. 
By him was built the city (called) Champapuri. To him 
(Champa) was born Sudiva whose son was Vijaya. Vahuka 
was his son, (and) to Vahuka was born Vrika, whose son | was 
Vahuka. 

The said king (Vahuka) repaired to forest (on being) 
robbed of his empire by the enemies. 

The queen, being desirous of dying with (her) husband 
(on the same funeral pile) who was old and dead, was pre: 
vented (from so doing) by Aurba, for he knew that she was 
carrying a child. 

The queen, known by the other wives of the king to be 
big with a child, was given poison with boiled rice, (and) the 
famous (king) known as Sagara, was born with that (poison.) 


30 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


Sagara was the sovereign of the world, by whose sons the oceans 

were made. He (Sagara) at the direction of (his) spiritual 

preceptor did not kill the Talajanghas, Yavans, Saks, Haihayas 

and Barbars, (but) made (them) look different. He made 

some (races) shaven-headed but bearded; some semi-shaven- 

headed ; some deprived of inner garments, and others de- 
prived of outter garments. 

- The said (king Sagara) according to the method adyised 

by Aurba, worshipped the ultimate Being Hari, the soul of the 

. universe,who pervades all the Vedas and Gods, by Acwamedha. 

In his Yajna, Indra stole the animal presented unto the 
gods with proper ceremonies. 

Obeying the order of (their) ities the - proud sons by 

(his wife) Sumati, excavated the whole earth (while) im search 
of the sacrificial horse. They perceived the horse towards 
the east by the side of Kapila. “(Here is) the stealer of 
horse, (he) remains with (his) eyes closed, (he is) sinful, kill 
him, kill him.” The sixty-thousand sons (of Sagara) with 
up-lifted arms, (shouting as described) advanced towards 
Kapila. The Muni then opened his eyes. 
* (The sons of Sagara) being deprived of (their) sense by 
Indra, (and) having committed that great transgression, became 
immediately burnt to ashes ‘by the fire (emanating from) ae 
person (of the great Mnni.) 

The popular saying that the royal sons were fried in the 
(fire of) anger of the Muni, is not (true.) How can darkness 
of anger be possible in (Kapila), the image of absolute good- 
ness ; (and who is capable of) perfecting the universe, as the 
earthly dust (cannot exist high up) in the sky. How can the 
sense of difference be possible in him who is omniscient, 
identical with the Supreme Soul, being promulgated by whom 
the Sankhya system (of philosophy exists) in this world (as) 
a strong .boat, by which those desirous of getting the final 

. emancipation (of soul), oross the-dreary ocean of world (which 
is) the path-way to death ; 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 31 


O king! (that son of Kapila) who was called Asamanjasa 
was (Kapila’s) own begotten son on Keginya. His son, 
Angguman by name, (was) engaged in doing good to (his) 
grandfather. (He was) an ascetic (but), on account of com- 
pany, became deviated from asceticism. Asimanjasa, who 
recollected the caste he (in previous life ) belonged to, 
deporting himself (as) As&manjasa, used in this world, to 
throw the playful children (guilty ‘of) doing culpable acts 
(calculated) to displease the blood-relations, into the (waters 
of) the Saruju by causing terror into (the heart of people). 
Thus behaving, giving up all affections, cast off by (his) 
father, (Asimanjasa) by virtue of (his) wealth of asceticism 
re-animated those children and then went away (from that 
place.) 

O king ! the inhabitants of Ajodhya got surprised at find- 
ing ail the children (so drowned) to return, and the king 
(Sagara) repented (of having cast off such a son). 

Anggum4n being appointed by the king (Sagara) to search 
out the horse, threaded the path excavated by (his) uncles 
and found the (sacrificial) horse close by the (heap of) ashes. 

There (Angcgum&an) seeing Narayana (in the form) of 
Muni by the name of Kapila, worshipped (him) with folded 
palms, making salutations, and concentrated attention (in 
the following strain.) 

(O Bhagawan)! the self-create has, till now, (failed) to see 
and know by absorbed meditation, thee who art the Supreme 
God (even to) him. How can we (know) then who have 
sprung from the mind, body and understanding of him 
(Brahma) and who are (consequently) ignorant ? 

The corporeal beings (in whom) the three (essential) pro- 
pettics (of physical existente) are supreme, cannot know thee 
who art self-existing (and absolute); nor (they) understand 
(thy) qualities; or (properly) they (see only) properties of 
darkness incidental to humanity, because (their) minds’ have 
been eclipsed by illusion, (and their understandings) confined 


32 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


to external (nature). How can I, who is ignorant, know thee 
(who is) the image of the essence of knowledge (and who 
is only) to be meditated upon by Sananda and other Munis 
whose illusions and consciousness of difference resulting from 
illusion, have been destroyed. (We) salute thee (O Lord) 1 who 
art the eternal- Being, (who) accepted form to impart 
lessons (unto others), (who art) above the laws of causation 
(and in whom) the illusions and the creative energy get harmo- 
nised. (O-Lord1) in this world (the result) of the illusion 
of thy creative energy, (people whose) hearts have been 
deluded by illusions and (whose hearts are) steeped in desire, 
passions and envy, travel from house to house believing (this 
illusive creation) to be real. O Bhagawan} O the soul of the 
universe! by (this) interview with thee, the strong fetters of 
illusion (which is) the fountain of desires and action, have 
-to-day got destroyed. 

THE AusPicious SuKA said:—O king1 having listened 
to this song (of praise), -Muni Kapila (who was a manifesta- 
tion of) Bhagaw4n, considering (all), said, as a matter of favour, 
the following words to Angcguman. 

THE AUSPICIOUS BHAGAWAN (KAPILA) said :—O child} 
there is the (sacrificial) animal, the ‘horse belonging to thy 
‘grandfather. Take it (away.) These (thy) fore-fathers who 
were burnt, stand in need of the (holy) waters of the Ganges 
and no other. ; 

Circling round him (Kapila) and saluting him by the head, 
(Ancguman) brought the (sacrificial) horse. Sagara concluded 
the Yajna by that animal. ; 

(Sagara) having given over the sovereignty to Anggumin, 
being free from all desires and from all ties (of illusion) gained, 
by following the path shewn by Aurba, the best of courses 
(salvation). 


CHAPTER IX. 


Te AUSPICIOUS SUKA_ said :—Angguman practised 
asceticism with desire of bringing down the Ganga; (but) 
could not (even) in.a long time succeed. So, in course of 
time, he died. 

His son, Dileepa, like him, being unable (to bring down 
the Ganga) died in course of time. His son Vagiratha pists 
tised the most austere asceticism. . 

Devi (Ganga) being gratified appeared belore him ; (and 
said) O child: (here) I am to grant (your) prayer.” 

The king (Vagiratha) being thus spoken to, bent (his body) 
and said expressing his desire. 

(Ganga said), “Who will resist the force of.me falling down 
to this earth; O king! otherwise (ce if not resisted) | will, 
passing through the earth, proceed on to the antipodes. 
Besides, I am not (very) willing to go to earth, (for) people 
will wash (their) sins off in me. O king! where shall I (go 
to) wash away that (sin)? Think of that.” 

THE AUSPICIOUS KING said :—The Sanyasis, the peaceful, 
those devoted to Brahma, the saints who purify the world 
will purge off (thy) sin by their physical contract (with thee). 
In them dwells Hari, the destroyer of sin. Rudra, the soul 
of the corporeal beings, in whom exists this universe as threads. 
(exist) length and cross-wise in cloths, will hold thy force. 

The said king (Vagiratha) having said this, pleased Siva by 
practising asceticism. O king! the God say) became 
pleased with him in a short time. 

Siva, the doer of good to all human beings ae ad- 
dressed by the king (Vagiratha) said, “be it so”, and carefully 
held Gnnga, the waters (of which) had become holy by (the 
touch) of the feet of Hari. 

E 


34 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


The said ascetic king Vagiratha led the universe-purifying 
Ganga whither lay the bodies of (his) ancestors, turned into 
ashes. Ganga following (the king) driving in the charriot 
having the velocity of wind (and) making the countries holy, 
watered the sons of Sagara (who were) turned into ashes. 
By the very touch of whose waters, the sons of Sagara, al- 
though burnt by the curse of Brahma, went to heaven 
(rising) from merely the ashes of (their) body, What may be 
(the glory) of those who, keeping to the rules of austerities, 
worship with devotion Devi Ganga, (by the very touch of 
whose waters) the sons of Sagara went to heaven in their 
burnt-to-ashes body. 

The glories of Swardhuni (Ganga) who emancipates (one) 
from (the ties of) this world, and springs from the lotus-feet of 
the eternal (Hari), as described herein, are not to be wondei ed 
at. The pure-minded munis concentrating their mind with 
devotion in the (said Eternal Being), and casting off insepar- 
able tripple-quality-conditioned (body) instantaneously attain 
identity with the spirit of (the Eternal Being). 

Sruta was the son of Vagiratha ; whose son was Nabha. Tu 
Nabha was born Sindhudwipa ; and to him was born Ajutayu. 
Rituparna, the friend of Nala, was the son of Ajutayu, who 
(Rituparna) imparted the science of check-play unto Nala 
and learnt from him the equestrian science. The son of 
Rituparna was Sarbakama, whose son was Sudasa. Sudisa’s 
son was a king (and) husband of Damayanti, who is some- 
times called Mitrasaha and sometimes Kalmashanghri. 

Childless (Kalmashanghri) became, by, his own acts, a 
Rakshasa on aceount of the curse of Vagishtha. . 

THE AUSPICIOUS KING (PARIKSHIT) said :—I am desirous 
to know, if (there is) no secrecy about it,why the noble-minded 
Saudhasha was cursed by his preceptor. 

THE AUSPICIOUS SUKA said :—Saudhasha while hunting 
out, killed a Rakshasa, but let off his brother (who) went away 
to take revenge. (Then) having accepted the image of a cook, 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 35 


(the Rakshasa) with the motive of making the king sinful, 
served human flesh to the spiritual preceptor, who was desirous 
of dining (there). 

The adorable (Vagishtha) immediately found the same (dish) 
uneatable, (and) being angry cursed the king (as follows) “for 
this, be thou a Rakshasa.” (Then Vacishtha) coming to 
know (that) that was done by the Rakshasa performed a 
twelve-years (yajna). Saudasa also taking water in the cavity 
of (his) palms, made preparations to curse the spiritual pre- 
ceptor; (but) being prevented by Damayanti (his wife), the 
king threw that angry water on (his own) feet. 

King (Saudasa) became a R4akshasa at (his) feet; (and) 
found all the quarters, the sky and the earth full of animated. 
beings. (Sauddsa) perceived a nuptial pair of Brahmanas 
ergaged at sexual intercourse ; (but Saudasa) being hungry 
caught hold of the Brahmana. His (brahmana’s) wife satd 
plaintively, “thou art a true warrior (belonging) to the 
Ikshaku (family). O warrior! thou art the husband of Dama- 
yanti; do not commit any sin. Give back (my) twice-born hus- 
hand unto me who desires children, (and) whose sexual gratifica- 
tion is not yet over. O king! this earthly body of hunan beings 
is capable of securing eternal blessing. O warrior | that is why 
the destruction of the said body is assumed to be the destruc- 
tion of all purposes. This Brahmana is !earned, possessed of 
the qualities of an ascetic, (and has) the desire of worship- 
ping the Brahma who is called the Ultimate Being (and who) 
exists in all beings (as their) soul. O the powerful; O the 
Dharma-knowing | how can the taking of life of the best of 
ascetic Brahmanas be proper for the best of the aseetic kings, 
as child is not (proper to be killed by their own) father. The 
conscientious, the wise and the learned designate the affection 
for all these beings, shown by deed, word and mind, as (the 
true essence of) character. To kill a cow is as sinful (as it is 
to kill a Brahman), then how do you think (it) proper to 
kill a child devoted to Brahma. If you are going to eat olf 


36 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


_ (wy husband) without whom I <an not live a moment, do first 
eat me who is more dead (than alive).” : 

Disregarding (the wife) thus bewailing ina plaintive way, 
whose husband seemed as-though lost, Saudasa, being guided 
by curse, ate (the Brahmana) as tiger eats (other) animals. 

The wife of the Brahmana finding him eaten up who could 
beget children (on her), began to bewail, and being angry 

_ cursed the lord of the earth (in the following strain.) 

“O the sinful! thou hast eaten my husband whilst engaged 
in sexual intercourse. O the unconscientious,- thou shalt also 
be dead while engaged .in sexual intercourse.” 

The (Brahman-wife) throughly devoted to (her) bushand 
having thus cursed Saudasa, threw (for cremation) in the 
blazing fire his bones and followed the ways of her husband 
(immolated herself in the funeral pile.) 

Being freed from the curse at the expiration of twelve 
years, (Saudasa) attempted to gratify sexual desire, (but) he 
was prevented (from that) by the queen reporting the curse 
(given).by the Brahman-wife. Thenceforward, he gave up the 
pleasures of sexual intercourse, (and) remained childless. for 
his own acts. (Then) being directed by. (the king), Vacishtha 
begat child on Damayanti (the queen.) 

The said (queen) carried for seven years, (but) did not 
deliver. (Thereon) Vacishtha operated on her abdomen with 
a (piece of) stone; and that is why he is called Agmaka. 

To Agmaka was born Valika who, having been protected 
by females, came to be called Narikabacha. (He is also) 
called Mulaka (the world getting) deprived of kshatriyas. 

To him was born Dagaratha; to whom a son, Airabira, 
was born; whose son was Vi¢wasaha. The king Vigwasaha 

got a son (called) Khattanga, who was. a sovereign. 
Khattanga, the invincible in wars, being requested by the 
gods, killed the Daityas, (but) having come to know, that 
(he was to live for a while only, (he) came to (his), capital 
and concentrated (his) mind (in the God). My own .life, 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 37 


children, wealth, world, kingdom and wife are not dearer 
to me than my family-god, the Brahma. My mind does not 
get attracted to the slightest of sin. I do not see anything 
except auspicious-named (Vagaw4n). I have been promised 
the fulfilment of the desired by God, the lord of the. universe. 
(But) I, whose mind has become absorbed in the Vagaw4n, 
do not want that favour. Even the Gods, whose passions 
and understanding are impetuous, cannot know the eternal 
soul dwelling in their heart; how can it then be possible 
for others? Now, having descarded, by virtue of the spirit 
of the lord of universe, the possessions resembling the city 
of the Gandharvas created by the illusive energy of God 
which naturally get intertwingled with (one’s) soul ; go I to 
seek the protection of Him. 

The king (Khattanga) saturated with the spirit of 
Narayana, having thus made up his mind, (and) getting rid 
of the ignorance (consequent on the) physical pride, remained 
in the (purely) natural state of the Ego. 

Whoever chahts with devotion the Vagawan Vasudeva, 
who is spirit (and is considered) formless, but who is really 
modulous, (attains) the ultimate Brahma. 


CHAPTER X. 


tees eeenaemenl 


yee AUSPICIOUS SUKA said:—To Khattanga was born 
Dirghabahu ; to whom was born Raghu. Prithugraba was 
the son of Raghu; and to him was born Aja; and his son 
was the emperor Dag¢aratha. ; 

The Vagawan, Vasudeva Hari (who is) full of Brahma 
being prayed by the Gods, (incarnated Himself) as the son 


38 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


of Dacaratha by dividing (Himself) into four parts; (and) 
took the names of Rama, Lakshmana, Bharata and Satrughna. 

O king ! the life of the said husband of Sita, repeatedly 
described by Munis having perfect knowledge of the Infinite, 
has been heard by you. 

May he (Ramachandra) the lord of Kosalas protect us, 
who, for the promise of his father, went to forest, the weary 
of whose journey was releived by (his) wife having feet (as 
tender and delicate as) the lotus and which could not even bear 
the touch of (her husband’s) palms, (and) by Hanuman and 
his younger brother ; who terrified the ocean by the angry 
movement of (his) eye-brows occasioned by the separation 
from his dear wife at Surpanakha having been disfigured ; who 
bridged over the ocean and burnt the wicked forest (such 
as Ravana and-others); who killed Miricha and other best of 
the Rakshasas in the yajna of VigwAmitra (although they were) 
being looked at by Lakshmana. 

GQ king! in the room for Sita to freely choose (her) hus- 
‘band (where) assembled (the best of) human warriors, he 
(Ramachandra) took up and broke, in the middle, the divine 
bow of great strength (which) was brought down by three 
hundred (bearers), (as easily) as the young elephant (breaks) 
the sugarcane plant. He gained glory (by gaining) the 
wealth, called Sita, to his breast (who was gifted) with. equal 
qualifications, character, age, proportions of the limbs, and 
beauty, (and while) on his way (to Ajodhya), humbled the 
great vanity of Paracuram, who extirpated the seed of kings 
(¢. é@. the Kshatriyas) from the earth three (into seven) times. 

The said (Ramachandra) together with his wife, obeyed 
the order of (his) father who had, although hen-pecked, bound 
(himself) down by the fetters of promise; (and) renouncing 
the kingdom, wealth, the dear ones, the friends, and the 
house, repaired to forest (as) the Yogy (gives up his) life. 

(Rama) who was carrying bow in hand which was inval- 
nerable, disfigured the beauty of the .passionate sister of 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 39 


the Rakshasa (Ravana); (and thereafter) killed fourteen 
thousands of the chief friends (of the Rakshasa such as) 
‘Khara, Trigira, Dushana ; (and then) roving (in the forest) 
passed (time) in (great) hardship. 

O king! being led away from the hermitage, (Rama- 
chandra) forthwith killed with arrow (just as) the terrible 
(Rudra killed) Brahma (passing in the form of a deer), 
Miricha who had assumed a beautiful body and was sent by 
the ten-headed (Ravana) whose passions were fired by the 
story (of the beauties) of Sita. 

The daughter of the’ king of Vaideha (Sita) being (as) 
stealthily stolen by the debased (Ravana) as the tiger (does, 
when stealing its prey), Rama separated from (his) wife, roved 
miserably in the forest followed by (his) brother, as if to 
teach the world (the lesson) “this is the ultimate fate of 
those who associate with females.” 

Now, (Rama) whose feet are worshipped by Brahma and 
Siva; (and who was followed) by his younger brother, cre- 
mated (Yataéyusha) who was killed for his sake ; and he killed 
Kabandha. (Then) having’ made alliance with the monkeys, 
Rama came to learn, through them, the condition of his wife; 
(and) having killed Bali went ‘to sea-shore with the army of 
the monkeys. | 

The ocean, whose sound was hushed on account of fear, 
(and whereof) the sharks and monsters were frightened in 
consequence of his (Ramachandra’s) angry look, assumed 
form, and coming up to the lotus feet (of Ramachandra) 
with offerings for worship on the head, said as follows:— 

**O the all-pervading (god)! we are ignorant; (and there- 
fore) we no not know thee (who art) the ultimate Being, the 
Lord of the universe, and without modulations; from (thy) 
quality of passion (have been born) the divine personages, 
and from thy quality of darkness (Zama) have been born 
the lords of beings; and thou art the lord of the (three) 
qualities. Go ‘thou at thy pleasure; and kill Ravana, the 


40 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


terror of the universe (and who is as it were) the execretions 
of Vicraba. O the warrior! regain (thy) wife. Make a 
bridge here (across me) availing wich the worid-conauering 
kings will widely chant thy praise.” 

The Lord of the Raghus having bridged: the ocean with 
various mountain summits, whereof the trees and plants were 
shaken by the ‘hands of the warrior monkeys, entered the 
previously-burnt Lanka with the horrible-looking army (com- 
' posed of) Sugriva, Nila, Hanum4n and others. 

The monkey army ‘barricaded the play-ground, barns, 
treasury, gates, cow- -folds, the main entrance to the city, 
the council-hall, the turrets and pegion-holes of Lanka (as 
completely) as the flock of elephants (obstruct) the river. 
The pedastals, minarets, flags, golden vases, the public 
thorough-fairs (of Lanka) were all broken; and the said city 
(seemed as it were in) tupsy-turvy. 

The Lord of the Rakshasas observing that dened of 
Lank&, sent out (followers as) Nikumbha, Kumbha, Dhum- 
raksha, Durmukha, Suranta, Naranta and others; (as well as) 
children (such as) Prahusta, Atikaya, Bikampa and others (to 
oppose the monkey army). - 

Rama strengthened by Sugriva, Lakshmana, Hanuman 
Nila, Angada, Riksha, Jimbuban, Panasa and others, set out 
to wage war with the Rakshasa army (which was) provided 
with swords, pikes, bow, daggars arrows, spears, lances, and 
“forts. 

- Angada and other colonels of the lord of the Rachis 
(Rama), thus attacked the warriors provided with elephants, 
horses and charriots as (there) might be a (fierce) skirmish ; 
(and) killed with mountains, trees,clubs,and arrows (Rakshasas) 
the blessings of whose lord, Ravana, were destroyed for 
having stolen Sita. 

The lord of the Rakshasas observing the destruction of 
(his) own army (became) angry and hurt with sharp arrows 
Rama who was looking brilliarft in the divine charriot’’ 


s 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 4i- 


(which was) effulgent and brought down by Ma§tali. (the 
charrioteer of Indra. 

Rama addressed him (as follows) “O cannibal! thou. art 
(like) the execretion (of the Rakshasas), that (thou) hast like 
dogs, stealthily stolen (my wife). I whose power is unfailing 
will-té-day, as your death, deal out: (unto thee) the punishment 
(thou deservest) who art shameless and blameworthy. 

Having thus reproached (Ravana), he put the string to 
(his) bow and darted the arrow (which) pierced the heart (of 
Ravana) as thunder-bolt; and he (Ravana) vomitting out 
blood by (his) ten mouths, fell down from the charriot; as 
(down comes from Heaven) the good with little virtue; and 
people (all around) began to bewil (his fate). 

Thereafter, thousands and thousands of Rakshasas came 
out of Lanka with Mandadari, and hurried on (towards) the 
battle-field crying (and wailing). (And they) embraced their 
own relations (who lay dead in the battle-field) pierced with 
the arrows darted by Lakshmana, in a plaintive way hurting 
themselves and (wailing out) sweet sound. 

_O. Lord! O Ravana ! the terror of the world! Ah! we are 
ruined. Deprived of you, whom will Lanka (which is, now 
being) trampled upon by enemies look up to for protection ? 
O the high-minded ! being fired with passion, thou hast failed 
‘to measure the powers of Sita, by which (powers) thou hast 
attained this end. O the bestower of happiness on the 
family 1 (thou hast) made Lanka widow. (By thine own folly 
thou) hast made this (thy) body eatable to vultures only, and 
(thy) soul (fit for) hell. . 

THE Auspicious SuKA said :—Being directed by the lord 
of Kosala, Bibhishana performed yajna for the spiritual benefit 
of (his) agnates after the prescription of yajna (called) 
Pitrimedha. 

Thereafter, Vagawan (Ramachandra) saw (his wife) guter 
ing from the disease of his separation, as it were ; (who wasf 
living at the foot of the Singcap& tree, (and consequently 

Fe 


42 : SRIMADBHAGABATAM, 


became) very weak. Rama felt pity at finding (his) most be- 
loved wife (so) miserable. (Then) he placed (his wife whose) 
lotus face was blooming with the ecstacy at the interview 
with him, on the charriot ; (and) followed by his brothers and 
Hanumin (he) ascended the charriot (himself.) 

Vagawan (Ramachandra) gave over Lanka (with her teem- 
ing) population of Rakshasas to Bibhishana, and blessed him 
with life (as long as) the eternity ; and he returned to the city 
(of Ajodhya) having completed the promised period of banish- 
ment. On (his) way back (to Ajodhya) he was being buried 
with flowers thrown by the Gods, and his character was sung 
by Gandharbas such as Satadhriti (and others). The most 
kind-hearted (Ramachandra) heard that (his) brother Bharat 
was living on barley boiled in the urine of ‘cow; (was) put- 
ting on bark (of trees) and was sleeping (as an act of morti- 
. fication and penance) on rough ground prepared for-sacrificial 

purposes. 

Bharata having heard (that his) elder brother Rama was 
coming, sallied out, with the shoes (of his brother) on his head, 
of his own camp at Nandigrama accompanied by citizens, 
ministers and priests (amidst) the sound of vocal and instru- 
mental music, with worshippers of Brahma loudly and 
incessantly reading (the Vedas); flags with golden borders ; 
charriots with golden pinnacles’; soldiers (mounted on) beauti- 

- ful horses and dressed and well-protected in golden dresses; 
public women drawn in lines ; foot servants ; various jewels 
worthy of being presented to kings. Bharata, whose: heart. 
was melted with (filial) affection, fell to the feet (of Rama). 
Bharata bathed in the tears of his ‘eyes, with folded arms 
and tears in his eyes, placed the shoes (of Rama) 
before him and Jong remained embracing (Rama) with his 
hands. 

Rima with Lakshmana .and. Siti,:salutedthe feet of the 
Reishi and. the’ elders. of . the family. and‘ was: himself* 
saluted, to by.(his) subjects. .- Ho al ae ee ARE 


SRIMADBHAGARBATAM. — 43. 


The people of North Kosala having seen their lord return 
after long absence (began to) shake their scarf with joy and 
throwing garlands of flowers on (Rama) began to dance. 

Bharata held shoes, Bibhishana and Sugriva chowri, the 
son of Maruta (Hanuman) white umbrellas (at the time Rama): 
entered Ajodhya. O king! Satrughana held bow and arrows |} 
Sita pitchers full of waters of holy places, and Angada (held) 
dagger and Jambuban golden armour. 


O king! Rama being praised by females, chanted by 
panegyrists, looked (as) resplendant in the charriot (called) 
Puspaka as the Vagawan Moon (does) with her satellites. 

Then Rama cordially welcomed by (his) brother (Bharata) 
entered the city (where) merry-making (was going on.) Then 
entering the palace saluted the wife of (his) spiritual pre- 
ceptor, his mothers and the spiritual preceptor; (and was) 
saluted to by his friends and youngers. Sita and Lakshmana 
remained, as they should, by his side. 

His mothers threw off (their) mourning by bathing (Rama) 
with the tears of (their) eyes and drawing him on (their) lap; 
and (it seemed, as if) soul came to (their) body. 

The spiritual preceptor Vagistha with the elders of the 
family removed the matted hair (of Rama) and sprinkled on 
him,as is required (by religious rites), the waters of four oceans 
(as is done in worshipping) the king of the Gods (Indra). 

(Rama) the washing of (whose) head was thus completed, 
(who was) well-dressed, held garlands of flowers (and was 

. bedecked) with ornaments, looked brilliant with his brothers. 
and wife who were (all) richly dressed. 

Rama being saluted to and gratified by his brother Bharata, 
accepted the throne and ruled over the subjects who who were 
devoted to their Dharma and possessed of the virtues of their 
tribe and order, (as though he were their) father. (And they 
also) considered him (as their) father; (and though) the second 
cycle of creation was present (yet the advantages of) the first 
cycle were enjoyed. . 


44 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


O the Lord of Bharata! Rama, who was conversant with 
Dharma and the giver of happiness to all creatures, having 
accepted sovereignty, (even) the forests, rivers, mountains, 
years, islands, and oceans became the giver of the desired 
to all the subjects. -, 

Rama, the manifestation of Vishnu, having accepted 
sovereignty, the mental and physical diseases, the effect of 
of old age, discomfort, misery, bereavement, fear, exhaustion 
and undesirable death (of people) were removed. Pure Rama, 
devoted to one (legitimate) wife taught (his subjects) the 
character (duties) of an ascetic King and the duties of the 
house-holder; and practised them himself. The chaste, the 
model of modesty, the reader of heart, Sita gained the heart of 
(her) husband by affection, bashfulness, (Anxiety mixed with) 
apprehension and devotion of character. 


CHAPTER XI. 


le AUSPICIOUS SUKA said:—Vagwan Rama (helped 
by) the spiritual preceptors, himself began to worship (his 
own) self, the God pervading all the Gods, by the very best of 
yajnas. The powerful (Rama) granted the eastern quarter 
(realm) unto the priest reciting the prayers from the Rig 
Vedas; the southern quarter to the priest worshipping the 
Brahma; the western quarter to the priests reciting prayers 
from Yajur Veda; and the northern quarters to the priests 
chanting the Shama verses; and remaining all the land at 
the centre (of these four quarters) to the high priest, consider- 
ing in his mind that “the Brahman who has mastered the 
desires deserves all this.” 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 48 


The said (Rama after the gifts made) had only ornaments 
and dresses left, and the queen Vaidehi (Sita) also remained 
possessed of her ornaments (only). 

They (the Brahmans) also observing the remarkable kind- 
ness of (Rama to whom) the Brahmans were Gods, became 
(highly) gratified, and returning, with flowing heart all that 
to him said :— 

O Bhagawan, the Lord of the universe ! what has not been 
given unto us by thee, when entering into our heart of hearts 
(thou hast) by thy brightness destroyed the darkness (of our 
heart)? We salute unto Rama, the universal god, whose 
memory is indestructible, who is the best of the virtuous, to 
whose feet have the munis concentrated their attention. 

Once on a time, Rama desirous of knowing the public. 
opinion, strolled out at night secretly and without being seen 

_ (by anybody) ; and heard some body say something touching 
(his wife), ‘I will not support thee,” (Rama heard him say), 
“who art unchaste, wicked and livest in another's house; 
although the hen-pecked Rama supports Sita. But! will not 
support.” 

Sita was forsaken by Rama who got frightened (at hearing 
such remark) from innumerable disobedient ignorant (people) ; 
and so (she) took refuge at the hermitage of Valmiki. Preg- 
nant (Sita) was delivered of twin sons when the period was 
full. 

These sons came (to be) known as Kuga and Laba. The 
muni performed their (birth) rites. The sons of Lakshmana 
were known as Angada and Chitraketu. O king! Bharata 

had (sons named) Taksha and Puskala; to Satrughna were 
born Sub4hu and Srutasena. 

Bharata in conquering the world, killed millions and milli- 
ons of Gandharvas ; and bringing all their treasures presented 
(them) unto the king (Rama). 

Satrughna having killed the Rakshasa Lavana, the son of 
Madhu, built the city called Mathura. 


46 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


Sita abandoned by (her) husband, entered the opening (into 
the earth) by commending (her twin sons) into the care of) 
Muni (Valmiki). 

Bhagawan Rama, having heard that, suppressed (his) 
bereavement by the strength of (his) mind ; and although him- 
self) the God, (yet subsequently) failed to suppress bereave- 
ment at recollecting her various qualities (and acts). 

Such attachment between the males and females is (source 
of) apprehension (even to) Gods ; what then (in the case of) 
village family-men ? 

Thenceforward, the powerful (Rama) observing (utmost) 
austerity performed incessantly, (the yajna) in which a per- 
petual sacred fire is to be maintained, (which) extended over 
thirteen thousand years. Then Rama having placed his feet 
pricked with the thorns of Dandaka (forest), on the heart of 
(the devotees) remembering (the incedent), attained his own 
(spiritual) illumination. 

(That he) bridged over the ocean, and killed the Rakshasas 


with arms, is no (object of) praise to the Lord of the Raghus: 


who assumed form at the request of the Gods, and whose 
powers were devoid of excess and sameness. In the de- 
struction of his enemies (what) help could the monkey (render 
to him ?) 

(I) seek the protection of the lotus-feet (of Ramachandra) 
worshipped by the gods and the kings; whose far-reaching, 
sin-absolving, purest praises are still now chanted by the 
munis at the assembly of the kings. 

The people of Kosala who have seen him (Rama), or 


touched (him), or sat with (him), or were devoted to (him), have — 


gone to the quarter (of heaven) where go the ascetics. O. 


king! people get over the fetters of action and attain tran- 
quility (of soul) by retaining the charater of Rama in (their) 
ears. 

THE -AUSPICIOS PARIKSHIT said:—How was the said 
Vagawana Rama himself ?. How did (he) behave with his own 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 47 


brothers and how did they (the brothers), the subjects and 
citizens behave with the divine (Rama) ? 


THE AUSPICIOUS VADARAYANI said :—Now, the lord of 
three worlds (Rama) ordered his brothers (to prepare for) 
conquering the world. (Then) accompanied by followers, 
(he) showed himself (unto his) blood-relations, (and Rama) 
looked at the city of Ajodhy& (of which) the roads were 
watered with scents and the juice flowing from the temples 
of elephants when in rut, (by citizens who) found their lord 
(after a long separation) and (who were) therefore maddened 
(as it were, and placed) golden vases on buildings, city-gates, 
council-halls, stone-built shrines and pleasure gates (decorated 
with) flags, banana and beettle-nuts with stems, head-gears 
made of rich and fancy clothes and garlands. 


The citizens approached him with befitting presents in 
hand, and conferred on him blessings. (And they addressed 
him). O Lord} support this earth raised by thee Sa the 
bed of ocean in the image of boar). 


Then, the subjects, both male and female, (iio eis) 
desirous of seeing (their) lord return after a long time, left 
(their) house and got up on the-(road-side) buildings, and 
{looked at) the lotus-eyed (Rama’ though) their he ‘were 
not satisfied, (and) they showered on him flowers. 

Then (Rama) entered his own house full of infinite and 
various treasures, and dresses of inestimable value (which 
were) all.enjoyed by his predecessor kings. The door frames 
whereof were made of pearls, the pedestals of corals, the. 
floor of lustrous emeralds, the walls of ‘brilliant crystals. 
(The house was decorated with) painted garlands, head-gears, 
countless rubies, dresses and pearls the (bright) lustres (of 
which) gladdened the, heart ; the delightful, enjoyable things ; 
the aromatic incense and chandeliers, sweet scented fiower 
garlarids, males and females (as beautiful as) the” gods and 
dressed with the very best of dresses. 


48 os SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


(There) in that (house) the Vagawin Rama the best of the 
wise (and who had found) tranquility in his own soul, enjoyed 
life with (his) darling Sita (whose heart) was full of affection. 

Rama, whose feet are devotedly meditated on by the 
people, enjoyed ilife) for a great number of years without op- 
pressing any body. 


CHAPTER XII. 


————ee 


Tae AUSPICIOUS SUKA said :—Kuca got ason (by the 
name of) Atithi; to whom was born Nishadha. His son was 
Nabha; and his son was Pundarika; to whem was bora 
Kshemadhanya. To Kshemadhanya was born Devanika; to 
whom was born Heena. Now his (Devanika’s) son was Pari- 
jatra; and to him was born Valasthala. To Valasthala was 
born Vrajanabha who belonged to the solar race. 

The son of Vrajanabha was Sugana; and the son of 
(Sugana was) Bidhriti; to him was born Hiranyanabha, the 

_ disciple of Jaimini, (and whe was) the preceptor of austerities. 

From him (Hiranyanabha), the sage Yajnavalka, of Kesala, 
learnt the spiritual austerities (which is) capable of producing 
great consequences and which destroys the fetters (¢. ¢., gv- 
clinations) of heart. 
_ Puspa was the son of Hiranyanabha ; ‘te whom was bora 
Dhrubasandhi. Now (to Dhrubasandhi) was born Sudarcana ; 
and. to him was born Agnibarna. Sighra was the: son of 
Agnibarna; and his (Sighra’s).som was Maru. 

The said Maru who had obtained perfection in spiritual 
austeries, lived in the village (called) Kalapa. (Who ob, 


\ 


SRIMADBHAGABAT AM. 49 


serving) the extinction of the Solar race (at the close of) Kalz, 
procreated. To him (Maru) was born Prasugruta, whose son 
was Sandhi. Amarshana (was the son) of Prasucgruta; and 
his son was Mahaswana. To Mahaswan was born Vi¢wavahu ; 
whose son was Prasenajit ; and to him was born Takshaka. 

To Takshaka was born Vrihadbala, who was killed ia 
battle by (Abhimannyu) thy father. These are the preceding 
kings of the Ikshaku race. Now listen (to the history of) 
those (kings) that are to born. 

To Vrihadbala will be born a son by the name of Vriha- 
drana; and to him will be born Batsabridha, the doer of 
glorious acts. To Batsabridha will be born Pratibyoma ; and 
tohim Vanu. To Vaou will be born Dibaka, the commander 
of army. (To Dibaka) will be born the warrior Sahadeva; 
and to him will be bora Vrihadaswa, whose son (would be) 
Vanuman, To Vanuman (would be born) Pratikaswa; and 
to him Supratika. His son will be Marudeva; to whom (will 
be born) Sunakshatra, and to him Pushkara. To Pushkara 
will be born Autariksha, and his son would be Sutapa ; to 
whom would be born Amitrajit; and to him Vrihadraja. 
Varhi (would be the son of Vrihadraja) and to him Kritanjoya; 
whose son (would be) Ravanjoya. To Ravanjoya would be 
born Sanjoya ;- and to him Sakya. Sakya would be born 
Sudhoda. His son would be called Langula; and to him 
(would be born) Prasenajit ; to whom (would be born) Kshu- 
draka; whose son would be (called) Sumitra. 

These exhaust ‘the line (of kings) belonging to the race 
of Vrihadbala. The race of the Ikshakus would terminate 
with Sumitra, and the race in (the period called) Kali, would 
determine with Sumitra as king. 


CHAPTER XIII. 


Tue AUSPICIOUS SUKA said :—Nimi, the son of Ikshaku, 
having began (the performance of a) yajna, appointed 
Vacishtha as the priest. The said Vagishtha also addressed 
(as follows) ; “ Oh king Nimit (I have been) previously voted 
(as priest) by Indra. I will come after finishing that (yajna 
of Indra). Wait for me till then. - The lord of bouses (Nimi) 
remained in silence; and Vacishtha also performed the yajna 
of Indra. 

Nimi, who knew the £go, knowing (full well) that this 
(life) is uncertain, began the performance of yajna by other 
priests during the absence of (his) preceptor Vagishtha. 

The preceptor (Vagishtha) on his return after having 
finished that (yajna), found the transgression on the part of 
of (his) disciple ; (and so he) cursed (him) as follows. ‘ May 
the body of Nimi, who boasts of wisdom, fall.” » 

Nimi, on the other hand, cursed (his) preceptor who was 
irreligious, (in the tollowing way) “ May the -body of thee 
who hast forgotten dharma for temptation, fall as well.” 

Thus did Nimi, who had knowledge of the Ego, gave up 
his body. The great-grandfather (Vasishtha) was boru (in 
the womb of) Urvasi by Mitravaruna, 

The best of munis having placed his (Nimi’s) body in “Ate 
incenses spoke at the close of the yajnas (as follows) to the 
Gods who had assembled (there). “If (you are) pleased, and. 
and are powerful (enough), may this body of ‘king (Nimi) be 
resuscitated Nimi (the dead) ejaculated, “let me (é.c., my soul) 
be not joined to body (which is source of perpetual trouble).’’ 

Munis, who are devoted to Hari, are nottroubled by the 
apprehension of separation (with this body which is perish- 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. ; 51 


able) and they (therefore) do not desire to be joined to bodies, 
(but) meditate on the lotus feet of Hari. 

[have no desire (said Nimi) to hold this body (which is) 
the source of misery, breavement and apprehensions and the 
destruction of which (takes place) everywhere (as) the fishes 
(die) in the waters. 

THE Gops said:—-(Let Nimi) dwell in the eyes of 
corporeal beings, found only at the winking of eves, without 
physical -body and existing in the essence of the Ego. 


The great sages, apprehensive of anarchy amongst man- 
kind, churned the body of Nimi, and therefrom was born a 
son. 

The said son (by reason of his strange) birth was called 
Janaka ; Vaideha (z.2., body less) from being born from the 
body-less (Nimi) ; being born from (the act of) churning, (he 
was called) Mithila ; by whom was built the city of Mithila. 


Oh the lord of Earth! To him (Mithila) was born Udasasu; 
whose son was Nandivardhana. To him was born Suketu 
and his son was Devaradta. Vrihadratha was the son of 
Devarata; (and to Vrihadratha) was born Sudhritpita to whom 
was born Mahavirjya; whose son was Sudhriti, whose son 
was Dhristaketu. Now, to him was born Harjyaswa; and to 
him Maru; and to him Pratipaka; to whom was born 
Kritaratha, and his son was Devamidha, whose son was 
Viscuta, . Then (Visruta’s son was) Mahadhriti; to whom was 
born Kritirata ; whose son was Mohdroma: to whom was born 
Swarnaroma; whose son was Hriswaroia. 


To the said Hriswaroma tilling the earth for sacrificial ’ 
purposes, was born Siradhwaja. Being born at the extremity 
of plough-share, he was known as Siradhwaja. 

Oh king t his (Siradhwaja’s) son was {Kusudhwaja; whose 
son was Dharmadhwaja. Dharmadhwaja (had) two sons (by 
the name of) Kritadhwaja and Mitadhwaja. To Kritadhwaja 
was born Kesidhwaja ; and to Mitadhwaja Khandikya. 


52 SRIMADBHAGABATAM.: 


Oh king! (once ona. time) khandikya, the son of Kri-~ 
tadhwaja, (who was) well versed in the knowledge of the . 
Ego and conversant with (the philosophy of) Karma, being 
afraid of Kesidhwaja, fled away. 

His (Kesidhwaja’s) son was Vanuman, whese son was 
Satadumna; whose 'son was Suhi; and to whom was bern 
Sanadwaja ; whose son was Urjyaketu 
Then to him was born Aja, whose son was Purujit; whose 
son was Aristanemi, whose son was Srutayu; to whom was 
born Suporswaka, his son was Chitraratha; whose son was 
Kshemadhi, the lord of Mithila. His son was Samaratha; 
whose son was Satyaratha; to whom was born Upaguru; 
whose son was Upagupta belonging to the fire race. To 
Upagupta was born Vaswananta ; whose son was Yujurbana ; 
to whom was born Subhashana; and his son was Sruta | 
whose son was, Jaya; to whom was born Vijoya; whose > 
was Rita. Sunaka.was the son of Rita; whose son v 
Vithabya ; whose son was Dhritia Vahutaswa was the son of 
Dhriti ; whose son was Vasikriti the great. 

‘‘Oh king, These were the kings of Mithila. (They 
were) well versed in the knowledge of the £yo. By the 
grace of the lords of Yajnas, (these kings of Mithila) though 
living the family life (were still) free from the conflict of 
{misery and happiness). 


CHAPTER, XVI. 


‘ 


Te Ausprcrous. SUKA said :—O king) now listen to 
(the history) of the virtue-producing Junar race, ‘whereto 
belong the famous kings (such as) Aila and others. 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 53 


Atri, the son of the God born from the lotus in the naval- 
lake of the thousand-headed Being (Vagaw4n), was equal to 
his father in quality. From the eyes of him was born a son, 
Soma, full of nectar; who was made lord of the Brah- 
manas, the heavenly bodies and the deciduous herbs by 
Brahmi. 

The said (Soma) having conquered the three worlds wor. 
shipped (the Gods) by the sacrifice (yajna) capable of being 
performed only by a universal monarch. 

(Once on a time), he (Soma) Jed by vanity, forcibly stole 
Tara, the wife of Jupitar, Wher he (Soma) was repeatedly 
asked by the preceptor of the Gods (to return his wife), he 
on account of pride, did not part with (her). Therefore hap- 
pened the war between the Gods and the Danavas. 

Sukra (Venus) on account of ill-feeling towards Vrihaspati 
(Jupitar) embraced with Asuras (the cause of) Soma. (And) 
Hara, on account of affection, took up with the ligeon of ghosts 
(the cause of) the son of the spiritual preceptor (ie Vrihas- 
pati). The king of Gods (Indra) together with all the Gods 
followed the spiritual preceptor. Thence, took place on 
account of Tara, the war for the destfuction of the Gods and 
the Asuras. 

Now, being prayed by the son of Angirasa (Vrihaspati), 
the creator of the universe reproached Soma, and returned 
Tara to her husband, and the husband came to know her to 
be pregnant. 

“Oh the wicked !” (said the husband,) cast off, cast off (the 
child) begotten by another on my field. O the unchaste} 
{ who desire issue will not burn thee, my wile, into ashes.” 

T&r& got ashamed and was delivered of a son (as though 
made of) gold. The son of Angirasa (Vrihaspati) got inclined 
towards the baby, (as also was the case with) Soma. 

“This (son) is mine and not yours,” there being such aloud 
quarrel (between Vrihaspati and Soma) over him (the child), 


54 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


the Munis and the Gods asked (her). She was ashamed and 
did not say anything. 

The baby being enraged at the false shame (of its mother) 
said to her, “ Oh the unchaste! why don’t you speak. Forth 
with disclose thy fault.” 

Brahma called (her) to a corner, and comforting (her) 
asked (what the real fact was). (She) said slowly that 
(it was begotten by) Soma; and immediately did Soma catch 
up the baby. 

Oh king! the self-create gave him the designation of 
Budha, on account of his profound knowledge. The moon 
got happiness by (his) son. 

To him (Budha) through Ila was born (a son) who is known 
as Pururaba, 

At the house of Indra, the beauty, qualifications, noble: 
ness, suavity of manners, wealth and prowess of him (Puru- 
raba) was being sung by the divine sage (Narada) ; and hearing 
that, the Goddess Urvasi was hit with the arrow of Venus 
(ie became passionate) and appeared before him Pururaba. 

The woman (Urvasi) on account of the curse of Mitra- 
varuna became a hum: being, (and) hearing of the best of 
men (Pururaba) being as beautiful as the me came to his 
side self-possesed. 

The king (Pururaba) seeing the goddess (Urvasi) had (his) 
eyes dilated with pleasure and (his) whole limbs gladdened ; 
(and drawing her) aside spoke to her in charming words 
(as follows) — 

THE AUSPICIOUS Kinc said:—Oh the possessor of the 
best (most tempting) pelvic region} (be thy) advent blessed 
Take thy seat. What amItodo? Do have sexual inter- 
course with me. Let our sexual gratification extend overa 
long time. 

UrvAS! said :—Oh the beautiful | what female’s heart and 
eyes will not be attracted by thee ; embracing thy breast 
(whose heart) will not be inclined to sexual pleasures (with 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 55 


thee) ? Oh king! keep these two lambs as (thy) ward. Oh 
the passion-inspiring ! I will have sexual intercourse with 
thee. The qualified are said to be desirable to the fair sex, 
Oh the warrior! nectar is (to be) my food, and I will not 
(sufter) to see thee naked (on occasions) other than (that of) 
sexual intercourse. The noble-minded (king Pururaba) pro- 
mised “be it so”, 

(The king further said) Oh what human-hbeings-enchanting 
beauty! Oh what human-beings-enchanting deportment ! 
what man will not minister to thee (thy wishes) who hast 
come of (thine) own accord. 

The said best of mankind (Pururaha’) began to have, as 
was proper, sexual intercourse with her at the divine plea- 
sure (gardens such as) Chaitraratha, at (his) pleasure. 

(The king) delightfully spent a long time in having sexual 


intercourse with the goddess, (who smelt) the filaments of 
lotus, and by enjoying the pleasures (of kissing her) mouth. 

Indra without seeing Urvasi, (and consideing) that his 
assembly did not look beautiful without Urvasi, sent out the 
Gandharvas (in search of her). 

In the dead of night, when darkness (was fast) spreading 
around, they (the Gandharvas) arrived (there) and stole the 
two lambs made over (for safe custody) {to the king by 
Urvast. : 

The goddess (Urvasi) hearing the cry of her sons who 
were being carried away (began to lament in the followidg 
strain)—I am ruined by abad lord, who has no manliness 
and who has the vanity of being a warrior. From such a lord 
has been robbed by the pirate (my) sons. I am ruined. 
(The lord) isa male during the day, and lies down at 
night as a female. : 

(Pururaba) being hurt by the arrow of words (as) the 
elephant (is hurt) with hook, took up at (that dark) night a 
dagger, and being naked followed (the pirates) in anger. 


56 SRIMADBHAGABATAN. 

They (the Gandharvas) left the lambs there, and began 
to shine as the lightning*flashes, (Now) she saw the naked 
lord to bring the lambs. 

Aila (Pururab&) also became anxious at not finding (his) 
mistress in the bed. His heart given unto her, and distracted, 
(Pururaba) travelled (all over) the earth like an insane 
bewailing (the separation with the beauty). 


The said Pururaba finding her (in the company of) five 
maids of honour on the bank of the Saraswati in the field 
of Kurukshetra, got (his) face flashed with delight and uttered 
(the following) charming words :— 


Ah wife! ah the cruel-hearted! wait, wait. It is not 
proper for thee to abandon me now without comforting 
me. Let us speak (with each other). Oh goddess this (my) 
beautiful body left at a distance by thee drops down here; and 
this (my) body will be devoured by tigers and vultures. 


Urvasi said :—Oh king! do not in vain (bewail). Thou 
art a male being. These tigres (ze thy animal propensities) 
will not eat thee up. Female love is never constant to any 
(one male). The heart of the females is like the heart of the 
tigers. The females are cruel, insincere, jealous, bold in 
matters of love, and kill faithfull husband or brother for 
trifling matters. (Those who have known) liberty and are 
given to promiscuous interconrse, shew false faithfullness to 
to the foolish (males) ; and then descarding their affection 
desire new (males for sexual gratification). Oh lord 1 thou shalt 
have (the opportunity of having) sexual intercourse with me 
for one night at the end of a year. Oh king (by that inter- 
course) other issues will be born unto thee. 


The said king finding the goddess (Urvasi) pregnant, 
returned to his capital ; (and) at the end of the year again 
came to Urvasi, the mother of warriors. Having got .(Urvasi) 
in great pleasure (did he) pass a night with her. Then Urvasi 
said-to him (who was) disheartened on account of separation, 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. $7 


* pray to these Gandharvas (that) they might (be pleased 
to) give me unto thee. 

Oh king! (The Gandharvas) pleased with him (at being 
thus) prayed to, gave unto him a fire vase. 

(Then) be (Pururaba) believing it (the fire vase) to be 
Urvagi roved in forest ; (and then he) came to know (what it 
really was). Then leaving the fire vase in the forest, (he) ° 
returned to (his) house, and passed the nights in thinking of 
(Urvasi). : 

At the fall of the third cycle of creation, the three (Vedas) 
flashed in his (Pururaba’s) mind. Then the said (king) went 
over to the place where the vase was. (There he) found a 
banian tree (grown out of) the womb of fire. By that (tree) 
he made two fire-kindling woods, and churned the fire (with the 
desire of getting Urvasi.) 

The powerful (king) contemplating, according to the man- 
tras, the first wood as Urvasi, and the second his own self, 
and the intermediate (piece of wood as) son, churned the 
wood. 

At the churning carried on by him, (the God of) Fire was 
born ; from whom was born the Vedas. The (said God of Fire, 
possessed of) the three-fold Knowledge, was contemplated as 
his (Pururaba’s) son. 

The said king (Pururaba anxious) to find out the where. 
abouts of Urvasi, worshipped, with that fire, Hari the all- 
pervading, the self-create the lord of the yajnas. 

In the primeval days, there was one Veda, the seed of all 
words, (and the emblem of the mystical name of the Diety, 
the syllable) Om ; there was one God, the Narayana, and no 
other; the (God of) Fire was mundane; and one caste (by the 
name of) Hansa. 

Oh king at the beginning of the third cycle of creation, 
there came to be the three-fold (Vedas) from Pururaba ; and 
the said king (Pururaba) attained (the quarter of Heaven 
known as) Gandharva, by (the powers of) his son, the Fire. 

H 


Vv 
CHAPTER XVtT 


Tue AUSPICIOUS VADARAYANI said:—Oh king! from 
the womb of Urvasi were born six sons unto Pururaba. 
They were Ayu, Srutayu, Satyayu, Roya, Vejoya and Joya. 

(Now) Vasuman was the son of Srut@yu and Srutanjaya 
(that of) Satyayu. Eka was the son of Roya, and Amila of 
Joya. Bhima (was the son of) Vejoya; and to him Hotraka; 
whose son was Janhu who drank off the Gang& (holding her) 
in the hollow of his palms. Puru was the son of Janhu. His 
son was Vataka, whose son was Agaka; to whom was born 
Kuga; whose four sons were Kusimbu, Tanaya, Vasu, Kusa- 
nabha. (Now) Gadhi was born unto Kusambu. 

(Now) a Brahmana, Richika (by name) begged of (GAdhi, 
his) daughter, Salyabati (in marriage). Gadhi considering 
the bridegroom unworthy (of his daughter) spoke to Bhargava 
(as follows) Give (unto me) as the dowry of my daughter a 
thousand horses having dark-blue ear at one side and the 
effulgence of the moon ; for (we are) of the race of Kusika. 

The said (Richika) being thus spoken to and knowing the 
intention (of Gadhi) went to Varuna. Having brought and 
presented horses of that description (unto Gadhi) . married the 
beautiful (daughter of Gadhi.) 

The said ascetic (Richika, was prayed to by (his) wife and 
mother-in-law (both) desirous of, having children (born unto 
them). The muni having boiled the sacrificial rice (consecrat- 
ing that) by two (different) mantras went to bathe. In the 
interval, Satyavati was asked by (her) mother (in-law) her 
(portion of) the sacrificial rice, considering that that was 
better; and she gave unto her mother (her portion ef the 
rice), while she herself eat off the sacrificial rice meant for 
(her) mother (in-law). 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 5) 


On returning (after bath) the muni came to know that, 
(and) said to his wife (as follows), “ What wrong hast thou 
done, Thy son will be a terrible warrior and thy brother 
devoted to Brahma.” 

Being gratified by Satyavati (by such prayers as) “ let it 
not be thus,” Vargava said, “now, thy grandson will therefore 
be Jamadagini ; and thus was born (Jamadagni). 

She (Satyavati) also by reason of great meritorious acts 
became the river Kausiki which washes away the sin of 
people. 

Jamadagni married Renukd, the daughter of Renu. By 
the ascetic Vargava was begotten (on) her Vasu and other 
(sons), of whom the youngest is known as Rama, who is des- 
cribed (by the Munis) as being an incarnation of the Narayana 
and the determinator of the race of the Haihayas. He (the 
sid Rama) rendered this world devoid of the Kshatriyas 
seven into three times. Though his sin was very little, he 
killed the Kshatriyasavho were devoid of the Vedas, proud, 
clouded by (qualities known as) Raja and Zama and were (as 
it were) the burden of this earth. 

THE AuSPICIOUS KING said :—How did the kings (the 
Kshatriyas) who were not the master of (their) passions, 
offend the Bhagawan (Parasurama), for which reason (Rama) 
extirpated the race of the Kshatriyas so repeatedly. 

THE AUSPICIOUS VADARAYaNI said :—Arjuna, the lord of 
of the Haihayas and the best of the Kshatriyas, having wor- 
shipped Datta the portion of a portion of Narayana, by 
various acts, gained a thousand hands, the quality of being 
invulnerable in the midst of the enemies, inexhaustible pas- 
sions, prowess, glory, strength, and wealth which had the 
quality of infinite minuteness. 

The said (Arjuna) travelled with unimpeded speed all 
over the worlds as the air (does) mn 

(Once on a time) Arjuna maddened with passion, wearing 
elysium garland and surrounded by the very jewels of women 


60 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


was (engaged at) play in the waters of the Narmada; and 
impeded (the course of) the river with his (thousand) hands. 

The ten-headed (Ravana) who had the consciousness of 
being a warrior, found his‘camps flooded with the water of the 
river (of which) the current was running at the opposite direc- 
tion. So he (Ravana) could not bear the prowess of him 
(Arjuna). He got prepared to wage war with him. 

(Ravana) guilty of that sin committed in the presence of 
females, was easily imprisoned and kept in custody at Mahis- 
maty (the capital of Arjuna); and by whom (Arjuna), he was 
set at liberty as a monky (is let off as being worthless.) 

Once on a time, the said Arjuna (while) travelling through 
forests devoid of human _ beings on a hunting (excursion’, wil- 
lingly entered the hermitage of Jamadagni. ; 

The said Muni to whom asceticism was wealth, showect 
hospitality to that God.in man (Arjuna) who was followed bi, 
ministers, armies and horses, by a cow of plenty. 

Considering that wealth (the cow of plenty) more valuable 
than his (own) possessions, he (Arjuna) did not appreciate 
that hospitality, and with his Haihaya army coveted her (the 
of plenty) the invaluable agent for (success in the) asceticism 
in which maintenance of a perpetual and sacred fire is neces- 
sary. He (therefore) in his pride, directed his men to steal 
the cow of plenty belonging to the ascetic. 


They (the Haihaya army) carried off by force the lowing 
(cow) and its calf to Mahismati. 

Now as soon as the king (Arjuna) was gone,’ Rama (Para- 
curama) returned to the hermitage ; and learning of the said 
oppression of (Arjuna) became angry like'the serpent that 
is hurt. Having taken up a terrible axe, armour, anda 
bow with arrows, followed ,(Aryuna) as the fearful king of 
the beasts (lion) follows tiger. 


Entering the city, (Arjuna) perceived Parasurama clad 
with the skin of%black deer, with matted hair as resplen- 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 61 


dent as the sun, wilh arrows, axes, weapons and bow in his 
hands come (towards the city) with great force. 

. (Therefore Arjuna) sent out seventeen millions of terrible 
soldiers (equipped) with elephants, charriots, horses, clubs, 
arrows, swords, pikes, daggers, and lances; but Rama (ie 
Parasurama) alone killed the whole army. Wherever did go 
the said (Parasurama) who was hurting (all around) with the 
axe, whose prowess (resembled the strength of) mind and fire, 

: Who was capable of destroying the discus.of others, there 
fell to the ground (the warriors) whose hands, thighs, necks 

ere cut off and whose horses and charrioteers were killed. 

The Haihaya (Arjuna) rushed on (tothe field) in great 

nger observing his army lying on the field  soft- 
ned with the blood (of the dead and the dying soldiers) 
hose armour, arrows, limbs were cut off with the arrows 
nd axes of Rama. 

Now, the said Arjuna darted at Rama arrows simultane- 
ously (holding) five hundred bows in his (thousand) hands. 
Rama the foremost of the weilders of weapons, forthwith 
cut off those (arrows darted by Rama) with his one bow and 
arrow. 

Then in the battle, Rama with sharpest axes forcibly cut 
off the (thousand) hands (resembling) the hood of serpents, of 
Arjuna who was hurrying towards the battle field and throw- 
ing with his own hands mountains and trees. Rama cut off 
the head (of Arjuna) whose hands had been (already) cut off, 
as peaks (are removed) from the mountains. The father 
being killed, the ten thousand sons of Arjuna fled away 
(from the battle field) in (great) terror. 

(Parasurama) the suppressor of enemies, having regained 
the cow (of plenty) with her calf, (which was as it were) the 
unavoidable agent in the yajna in which perpetual sacred 
fire is tobe maintaind, returned tothe hermitage and pre- 
sented the afflicted (cow of plenty) unto his father, Rama 


62 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


related nnto his father and brother the said act .of his; and 
listening to that Jamadagni said (as follows). - 

Oh Rama! Ob Ramat Oh the gloriously armed thou hast 
committed sin. Thou hast unnecessarily killed the god in 
man (Arjuna) who is the personification of the all-pervading 
God. Oh child! we are Brahmanas. By the (quality of) 
forbearance, (we have) become objects of veneration. The 
divine, preceptor of human beings, (Brahma) attained by 
virtue of which (quality of forbearance) the position of 
universal veneration. (It is) on account of forbearance, that 
Lakshmi of Brahma appears as resplendent as the rays of the 
sun. The Bhagawan, God Hari becomes easily pleased with, 
the forbearing. Oh Ramat the taking of life ofthe king 
whose mind was consecrated has been more heinous than 
(that of) the murder of a Brahman. Now expiate this sin by: 
concentrating (thy) mind in Bhagawan and by pilgrimage. 


t 


CHAPTER XVIII. 


ee 


The AusPicious SuKka said:—Oh the son of Kuru 
Being thus advised by his father, Rama passed a year in 
pilgrimage, (and then) returned to the hermitage. I 

Once on a time, Renuka having gone to the Ganga, saw 
the king of the Gandharvas wearing garlands of lotus, to 
play with the Apsards. Having gone to the river to fetch 
water, she whose heart was somewhat attracted by Chitra- 
ratha (the king of the Gandharvas) who was playing, forgot 
the time of yajna. Coming to feel that delay and afraid of 
the curse of Muni, (she) retutned to the hermitage and placed 


is 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 63 


the pitcher before (the Muni), and remained standing with 
folded palms. 

The muni (Jamadagni) coming to know of the unchasteness 
of his wife, got enraged (and said), “O my sons! kill this 
sinner.” Although thus directed, they did not do so. 

The said Rama who was well aware of the powers of the 
muni in respect of meditations ‘and asceticism killed, being 
directed by his father, his mother along with his other 
brothers. 

The son of Satyvati (Jamadagni) was pleased and request- 
ed (Rama) to pray for any favour. Rama desired the reani- 

:mation of those killed and (their) forgetfulness (of the fact of 
their having been) killed. 

Immediately did, they get up as though after a (deep, 
sound) sleep. Rama, who was conscious of the powers of his 
father in regard to asceticism, took the life of his dear ones. 

Oh king! the sons of Arjuna worsted by the prowess of 
Rama, and remembering the murder of their father did not, 
in the least, feel happy. 

Once on a time, when Rama with his brothers had gone to 
forest from the hermitage, (the sons of Arjuna) desirous of 
avenging themselves (for the murder of their father) found a 
favourable opportunity and came (to the hermitage.) They 
who had made up (their) mind to perpetrate that sin, saw the 
virtuous muni, who had brought his mental faculties to a 
focus, in the house wherein was blazing the sacrificial fire, 
(and they) killed him. Although the mother of Rama plain- 
tively prayed (for the life of the muni), they, who were most 
cruel and (as it were) the refuse of the Kshatriyas, carried off 
the head (of the muni) by suddenly cutting it down. Renuka 
the mother of Rama, cast down with sorrow and bereave- 
ment began loudly to cry by uttering “Ah my child! Ramat 
Rama,’ and hunting herself in various other way. 

Rama having heard from distance the note of distress, “Oh 
Rama?’ hastened to the hermitage and saw his father killed, 


64 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


The said sons of Jamadagni who wete distracted with 
grief, anger, vindictiveness, sorrow and bereavement began 
to bewail as follows,—Oh father! {Oh Ascetic! Oh virtuous ! 

- leaving us behind, thou hast gone to Heaven. 

Rama having thus bewailed, placed the body of his 
father near that of his brothers and took up the axe and made 
up his mind to extirpate the Kshatriyas. 

Oh king 1 the said Rama having gone to Ma&hishmati, 
which the beauty was (already) destroyed for the sin of killin 
Brahman, built up a high mountain at the centre of the capit, 
with'the heads of the sons of Arjuna; and the powerf 
Paragurama caused a river to flow with their blood, whic 
caused fear unto the heart of those who were enemical to th 
Brdhmans. Taking the occasion of the murder of his fathe 
which brought evil upon the Kshatriyas, Parasurama mad 
the earth devoid of the Kshatriyas three into seven times 
and caused nine lakes of blood (to exist), at the holy plac 
called Samanta Panchaka. 

Then Rama bringing the head of his father in contac 
with the body and spreading (the same on) Kuga grass 
worshipped the God, the universal soul pervading all th 
Gods. He made a gift of the western quarters to the priest 
reciting the prayers from the Rig Veda; the southern 
quarters to the priest worshipping the Brahma; the eastern 
quarters to the priest reciting mantras from the Fayur Veda, 

_the northern quarters to the priest chanting the Shima 
Verses ; other quarters to other priests; the central place 
to Kacypa; the country (called) Arjyabarta, to the adviser, 
and other lands to the moderators. Then his sins getting 
expiated after performance in the great river Saraswati other 
supplementary sacrifice (bathing) to atone for the defects 
in the principle one, Purasurama looked as resplendant as 
the cloudless sun. 

The said Jamadagni being worshipped by Rama regained 
animation his body (existing, as it were) in the recollection 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 65 


and became the seventh saint in the constellation of (the 

seven) saints. 

O king! the adorable lotus-eyed Rama, the son of Jama- 
dagni, also will in the next grand period of destruction and 
creation promulgate the Vedas. 

The said (Parasurama), who has thrown aside the royal 
staff, whose intelligence is tranquil and whose character is 
being sung by the Sidhwas, Gandharvas, and Charanas, is 

. still living on the mount Mahendra. 

- The Vagawan, God Hari, (who is) the soul of the universe 
having incarnated himself in the race of the Vrigus, killed 
many times over the (KXshatriyas) to remove the great weight 
for sin) of this earth. 

To Gadhi was born the very powerful Vicwamitra (who 
esembled) the blazing purifier (fire), who getting over 
shatriyahood by asceticism attained the spirit of Brahma. 

O king | Vigwamitra had one hundred sons. (Although) 
he -second (of these was named) Madhutchanda (yet) they 
ll were called Madhutchandas. 

Now the (said Vigwamitra) having accepted Sunacefa 
he son of Ajigartha of the race of the Vrigus (as his) son, 
and naming him) Devarata, spoke to his sons ‘look upon 
his (Devarata) as your elder brother,” The said sacrificial 
being (Sunasefa) being sold (on the occasion of) the yajna 
f Harishchandra (to be slaughtered at the sacrifice) 
freed himself from the fetters by praying to Prajesa and other 
gods. The said ascetic (Sunagefa) of the race of Vrigu, 
being presented by the Gods at the sacrifice of the gods 
(came to be) called, Devarata in the line of Gadhi. 

The senior Madhutchandas (¢.e., the natural sons of Vigw4- 
mitra) did not consider that (z.e., looking upon Devarata as elder 
brothér) good. Thereat, the Muni (Vigwamitra) got offended 
and (cursed them as follows.) ‘O the wicked ! be you fallen.”’ 

Then Madhutchanda with fifty other (sons) said, “ which 
of us thou decidest (to be the eldest), we shall accept him 

I 


CHAPTER XVIIb 


Tie Auspicious Suka Said: -—Nahusha had _ sjx sons, 
Yati, Yajati, Garjati, Ayati, Viayati, and Kriti, such as une 
corporeal beings have six senses, e 

Yati, who was conscious of the eoiiee hence (of worldly 
possessions) did not desire (to have) the kingdom given (unto 
him) by his father ; (in as much as) therein (on, the throne) 
people fails to realise (the nature of) the Ego, 


(His) father (Nahusha) on being dethroned” by the twice 
born on account of his (Nahusha’s).misdemeanour towards th 
wife of Indra and on dis being converted into a serpent 
Yajati became the king. 


Brother (Y4jati) directed his younger brothers to rul 
over the four quarters, and (himself) marrying the daughter 
of Sukricharya and Vrishapurvana (the Daitya-king) pro 
tected the earth. 


THE AUSPICIOUS KING Said:—The adorable Kabya (Sukr: 
was the ascetic Brahman, and Nahusha was a Kshatriya. Ho 
could, therefore, be that contrary-to-caste-order marriag 
‘between the Kshatriya and Brahman ? 


THE auspicious SUKA Said:—Once on a time, th 
daughter of the lord of the Danavas the graceful Sarmistha 
(who was rather) irascible in temper being followed by a 
thousand companions and Devajani the daughter (of her) 
spiritual precetor was promenading in the (pleasure) garden 
‘of the city which was full of trees with blooming flowers and 
‘with lotus inhabited by harmoniously singing bees. The 
said lotus-eyed girls coming to,a tank, left their cloth on the 
bank and began to amuse themselves by splashing water on 
each other.” The girls seeing Girisha, with Devi (Bhagawati) 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 65, 


and became the seventh saint in the constellation of (the 
seven) saints. 

O king! the adorable lotus-eyed Rama, the son of Jama- 
dagni, also will in the next grand period of destruction and 
creation promulgate the Vedas. | 

The said (Parasurama), who has thrown aside the royal 
staff, whose intelligence is tranquil and whose character is 
being sung by the Sidhwas, Gandharvas, and Charanas, is 
Still living on the mount Mahendra. 

The Vagawan, God Hari, (who is) the soul of the universe 
having incarnated himself in the race of the Vrigus, killed 
many times over the (Kshatr iyas) to remove the great weight 
tof sin) of this earth. ’ 

To Gadhi was born the very powerful Vigwamitra (who 
gesembled) the blazing purifier (fire), who getting over 
E{shatriyahood by asceticism attained the spirit of Brahma. 

O king 1 Vigwamitra had one hundred sons. (Although) 
he second (of these was named) Madhutchanda (yet) they 
All were called Madhutchandas. 

Now the (said VigwAmitra) having accepted Sunagefa 
rhe son of Ajigartha of the race of the Vrigus (as his) son, 
and naming him) Devarata, spoke to his sons ‘look upon 
his- (Devarata) as your_ elder brother,” The said sacrificial 
being (Sunasefa) being sold (on the occasion of) the yajna 
of Harishchandra (to .be slaughtered at the sacrifice) 
freed himself from the fetters by praying to Prajesa and other 
gods. The said ascetic (Sunagefa) of the race of Vrigu, 
being presented by the Gods at the sacrifice of the gods 
(came to be) called, Devarata in the line of Gadhi. 

The senior Madhutchandas (ze. the natural sons of Vigwa- 
mitra) did not consider that (ze., looking upon Devarata as elder 
brother) good. Thereat, the Muni (Vigwamitra) got offended 
and (cursed them as follows.) “O the wicked | be you fallen.”” 

Then Madhutchanda with fifty other (sons) said, “ which 
of us thou decidest (to be the eldest), we shall accept him 


/ 


, 


/ 


CHAPTER XVIII. 


i AUSPICIOUS SUKA Said:—Nahusha had six sons, 

Yati, Yajati, Garjati, Ayati, Viayati, and Kriti, such as the 
corporeal beings have six senses. 
' Yati, who was conscious of the consequences (of worldly 
possessions) did not desire (to have) the kingdom given (unto 
him) by his father; (in as much as) therein (on the throne) 
people fails to realise (the nature of) the Zyo.  ~ 


(His) father (Nahusha) on being dethroned* by the twice- 
born on account of his (Nahusha’s) misdemeanour towards the, 
wife of Indra and on his being converted into a serpent, 
Yajati became the king. 


Brother (YAjati) directed his younger brothérs to rul 
over the four quarters, and (himself) marrying the daughter 
of Sukracbarya and Vrishapurvana (the Daitya-king) pro 
tected the earth. 


THE AUSPICIOUS KING Said:—The adorable Kabya (Sukra 
was the ascetic Brahman, and Nahusha was a Kshatriya. Hoy 
could, therefore, be that contrary-to-caste-order marriag 
between the Kshatriya and Brahman ? 


THE auspicious SuUKA Said:—Once on a time, the 
daughter of the lord of the Danavas the graceful Sarmistha 
(who was rather) irascible in temper being foliuwed by a 
thousand companions and Devajani the daughter (of her) 
spiritual precetor was promenading in the (pleasure) garden 
of the city which was full of trees with blooming flowers and 
with Jotus inhabited by harmoniously singing bees. The 
said lotus-eyed girls coming toa tank, left their cloth on the 
bank and began to amuse themselves by splashing water on 
each other. The girls seeing Girisha with Devi (Bhagawati) 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 69 


passing along on (his) bull, forthwith got on the bank and put 
on (their) cloth out of shame. 

Sarmishtha out of mistake put on the cloth of the 
daughter of her spiritual preceptor believing the same to 
be hers. (Thereat) Devajini got angry and spoke as 
follows :— 

Oht behold the impropriety of that maid-servant (Sar- 
mishtha)| she has put on the cloth to be worn by us as the 
bitch (partakes of) -the clarified butter at Yajnas. (The 
Brahmans) who have created this (universe) by asceticism ; 
who have sprung up from the mouth of the ultimate Being; 
who hold (possess) in this world the (spirit of) the Brahma; 
who have shown (the world) the blessed path (the Vedas) > 
who are being worshipped by the gods (who are) the lords o 
‘beings, and even by the Bhagawin Vishnu (who is) the soul 
f the Universe ; among them (Brahmanas) we belong to the/ 
ine of Vrigu. Her father who is an Asura is our disciple. 
hough such is the state of things, (yet) the unchaste (girl) 
as put on (the cloth) to be worn by us, like (the recital of) 
he Vedas by the Sudras. ; 

Saramishtha being thus rebuked (began to) heave out 
‘eep sighs of anger and bite her lips like the serpent trodden 
nder feet and spoke tu the daughter of her spiritual precept- 
r (as follows) :~ 


Oh beggar, art thou not (vainly) edifying thyself ignoring 
thine own acts (and conduct)? Dost thou not like the crows 
look up to our house (for support) ? 


The anger of Sarmishtha did not abate (although she) 
rebuked the daughter of the spiritual preceptor with such 
cross words; (and she) snatching off her (Devajani’s) cloth, 
threw her down into a well. 

Then (Sarmishtha) having come home, Yajati accidentally 
came a-hunting (there and) feeling thirsty (went up to the 
well and) saw her (Devajani) in it. The kind-hearted king 


72 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


this decripitude caused by thy maternal grandfather (has 
stood as a bar to) my getting satisfied about wordly enjoy- 
ments. Let me enjoy myself for some time with thy (youthful) 
age.” 

Jabu said:—“I do not like to live in the decripitude that 
has overtaken (you) in the middle (of your life). People 
cannot practise self denial without having enjoyed the worldly 
pleasures (first). 

Oh Bhirata| being requested by the father (to accept 
his decripitude) Turbashu, Drujhu, and Anu, who were not 
virtuous, and who believed (youth which is) transient to be 
eternal, refused (to accede to the request). 


(Then the king) said to his youngest son Puru who et 
well qualified, “Oh child; thou shouldst not disappoint me a 
your elder brothers (have done).” 2 


THE auspicious Puru said:—“ Oh the lord of huma 
beings! what man on this earth is capable of repaying 
(the debt of gratitude) to his father whose portion he is, and 
by whose grace he attains even the almighty God? H 
who acts up to the innermost desire of his father is the bes 
(of sons), he who carries out the orders of his father is nex 
to that (in merit), and he who disobeys the orders of hi 
father is the worst, refractory and (like) the execretions 
his father’. ~ 


Puru having said this, gladly accepted the decripitude 
his father. And the said king (Yajati) also began to enjoy 
the (earthly) pleasures as usual. 


(Yajati) the lord of the 
Subjects as though he were ( 
desires by his senses, the 
Devajani, his darling also, ev 
in privacy, by heart, words, b 
said king) worshipped ged Hari, 
who pervades all the gods, b Ya 


~ “SRIMABBHAGABATAM. 73 
© * r Bs 


‘The powerful (Yajati), whe renounced ail desires, worship- 
ped Narayana ‘Wasudeva who dweils in the Sieg: whe is 
indivisiblé,’ in whem this (universe) involves as the illusions 
in dream and ¢louds in the sky, by placing Him in the heart 
(of ‘Rearts). 

_ The: emperor (Yaj&ti) had not the satisfaction of heart, 
altiough (lie wershipped the supreme god) with the sixth 
sense ot mind), and with the inferior senses for thousands of 
years. 


CHAPTER XIX. 


See 


‘ 
‘ Tas AUSPICIOUS SwKA said :—-The said (Yaj&ti) thus 
enjoying (his life} came te fect his degeneration occasioned 
by his subjection te his wife; and, losing all love for worldly 
desires, nartated to his wife the following story :— 

Oh, the daughter ef Vargavay listen to the story of one, 
whe acted like me (and) whose (fate) is deplored: by the wise 

. living in the forests. 

"yy In the forest, a goat while in search after an object dear 
to him saw a she-geat down in a well on account of her evil 
deeds. The passionate he-goat thinking of the means td 
get her aut seperie a fight of steps (reaching the bottom 

d by digging earth with his horns. The beautiful 

iting out of the well desired him (for her 
pling the (said) she-goat (as his 

lich wwere) anxiously desiring 
proposed to (the he-goat, who 
srt in (the-art of) sexaul jnter- 

d possessing great venerial 


94 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


strength. The said he-goat, which was capable’ of gratifying 
the sexual appetite of (the whole lot of) the she-goats, forgot 
himself (as though) he were possessed by (the god of) 
Passion. The (she-goat) which had got out of the well could 
not bear (to see) the he-goat having sexual intercourse with 
another she-goat (which was) more handsome. (The said 
she-goat) being grieved at heart forsook her husband, which 
was wicked, passionate, fickle in love, outwardly loving, and 
given to sexual gratifications. The said goat (which was) 
subject to his wife and, grieved at heart, followed on the way 
with a murmering noise the said she-goat to please (her) ; 
but failed to satisfy her. Now, one Brahmana (who was) the 
lord (protector) of the she-goat cut off, in anger, the hanging 
testicle of the goat, but (the said Brahmana) who knew the 
remedy rejoined (them to the inguinal region of the goat} 
for the purpose (of the sexual gratification of his daughter). 

Oh dear { the goat also who regained (his) sexual powers ~ 
passed a long time with the she-goat saved from the well, 
(but) he is not yet satisfied about sexual gratification. 

Oh the beautiful! myself miserable in the like manifer, 
and being oppressed by (my) love for thee, I have, fascinated 
by thine enchantments, failed to know myself. 

Because, on this earth, the desires of people (whose) 
hearts have been animated with passion, do not get any 
satisfaction from paddy, barley, gold, animals and women. 

» Sexual appetite never gets satisfied by enjoyment but 
[ {on the contrary) it increases (by such enjoyments); as the fire 
blazes with vigour when fed with clarified butter. 

But, when (they succeed in) not making any difference 
in (their dealings with different) creation, when they are 
indifferent (to pleasure and pain, it is then that) people find 
happiness around. 

Do not keep the company of (even thy) mother, sister or 
daughter in privacy (because) passions (getting) impetus 
disturb even the learned. In full enjoym ent of earthly objects, 


SRIMADBIJAGABATAM. 75 


I have completed a thousand years, and yet (there has been 
no) satisfaction—(still there is) hankering after them. That 
is why I have been, having renounced these (earthly objects) 
and concentrating my heart unto the Brahm, (and being) 
indifferent to pleasure and pain, (and having) liberated 
the self, passing (my life) with the wild animals. 

He, who knows the Ego, knows-the- world (to be) the 
cause of self-destruction ; and (he) beloving what is seen_ and ; 
heard (to be) transient (does not get inclined) to. enjoy.them. 

Naliusha, having said this to his wife, made over (his) 
youth to Puru (his son), and renouncing all desires accepted 
his own decrepitude. He (then) made Drudjhu lord “over the 
south-weastern quarters; Jadu that of the South ; Turbashy 
that of the west ; Anu that of the East. And (he) repaired to 
the forest (after having) made over.the crown to Puru, who 
deserved the wealth of the whole universe, and made the 
elder brother subject to him. 


The said (Yajati) renounced in a moment the six senses 
(which were) enjoyed in the enjoyment of (earthly) objects 
for a. great many years as the twice-born (bird) leaves the 
nest (as soon as it is) fledged. 

Then the said (Yajati) being liberated from all connexions, 
getting emancipated from the three-fold qualities—(Satwa 
Raja, and Tama) by virtue of self-introspection, having 
placed his confidence in the most supreme, purest Vasudeva 
Brahmi attained to the state of Brahma. 

Devajani having heard (this) story considered (the same to 
be meant for) the emancipation of her soul (although the 
story) was told jocosely and as the outcome of the dis- 
appointment in the relation between men and women, 

O lord ! the said Bhargavi Devajani considered the compa- 
nionship with the dear ones (who are) obedient to God as 
illusive (as the conduct of) those who frequent the grog-shop ; 
and considcring every thing as unsubstantial) dream, severed 


76 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


all (earthly) ties, and gave-up this body (after) having con- 
centrated her mind to Krishna. 


Devapani gave up his body while uttering the following 
verse :— 


I salute unto thee O Vasudeva, the omniscient, the. nee 
of all created beings, the peaceful, the great Vagawan ! ! 


CHAPTER XX. 


‘Lae AUSPICIOUS VADARAYANI Said :—~-O Bharatat I will 
relate (unto thee) the line of Puru, whereto thou belongest, 
and whereto sprung up the family of many an Ascetic-king 
and Brahmana. , 

To Puru was born Janamejaya, and to him Prachinwia, 
whose son was Prabira, to whom was born Manushya; and 
to him was born Charupada. To Charupada was born a son 
(by the name of) Sudyu, to whom was born Bahugaba, and te 
him was born Sanjati, and his son was ALAS HEY: and his sgn 
was known as Randracwa. 

His ten sons begotten on Abritachi, an Apsara, are known 
as Ritaya, Kaksheya, Shandileya, Rriteyakh, Jaleya, 
Sannatyr. Dharniaya, Sateya, Brateya and the youngest 
Bancya. (These were what) the (ten) senses (are) to the 
Supreme Soul of the universe. Rantinaba was born unto 
Ritsya. Oking! he (Rantinaba) had three sons of Sumati, 
Dhruba and Apratiratha. Kanwa was the soa of Apratiratha ; 
whose son was Madhatithi ; and from him sprang the twice- 
bern (such as) Praskauna and others. Revi was the sem of 
Vumati, andto him was bern Dushmanta. 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 77 


(While) hunting out, Dushmanta got to the hermitage of 
Kanwa. There (he saw) a female, as if the incarnation of 
(some) diety, resembling Tama and illuminating (as it were 
all around) with her effulgence, (and he) instantaneously got 
enchanted. . 

Gladdened at her sight, relieved of all weariness, followed 
by a few soldiers, (Dushmanta) spoke to the best of women. 
Smiling and animated with sexual desires, (he) asked with 
sweet words—O the lotus-eyed'! who art thou? whose 
daughter art thou and what is thy motive (of staying) in 
this forest devoid (as it is) of human element? O the charm- 
ing-waisted ! the heart of the sons of Purus never delights in 
sinful acts. I understood (that) thou art the daughter of a 
Kshatriya. 

‘THE AUSPICIOUS CAKUNTALA said:+-Iam the daughter 
of Vigwamitra, left in the forest by Menaka. The 
adorable Kanwa knows this. O warrior! what may we do 
unto thee? Oh the lotus-eyed ! take thy seat (please), and 
accept our effetings. Here is rice, if thou desirist, (please) 
eat. 

Tuk ausPiclouS DUSHMANTA said:—Oh the beautiful! 
this befits those born in the line of the Kusikas—the royal 
gitls themselves choose (thus) worthy husbands. 

' (Sakuntalé) having expressed (her) consent, the king 
(Dushmanta), who was aware of the local customs of the 
period,married Sakuntala according to the rules of Gandharva. 
(marriage) and as is enjoined by dharma (Shastras). : 

The ascetic king, whose semen was unfailing, placed his 
seminal fluid in the queen, (and then) returned to his capital. 

In course of time she (Sakuntald) was delivered of a son. 
Kanwa performed in the forest the necessary rites about the 
newly-born boy. The said boy used to play with lions 
forcibly caught (by him). The best of the. pleasure-givers 
(Sakuntala) went to (her) husband with the boy who was -the 
incarnation of a portion of Hari, invincible and powerful. 


78 SRIMADBUHAGABATAM. 


When the king did not accept (his) wife and child (who 
were) blameless, (there was the followinz) voice in the air for 
the audience—(consisting of) all the created beings :—The 
mother is (simply) the recepticle. The child belongs unto 
the father by whom he is begotten. Oh Dushmanta, support 
(thy) son and do not insult Sakuntal4y; Oh God in mant 
the son saves him who discharges the seminal fluid from the 
clasp of Yama. Thou wert (truly) the progenitor of the 
conception, Sakuntala has given out the truth. The father 
having given up (the soveregnty) he (became) the emperor 
of great fame. On this earth, the glories of him who was 
the incarnation of a portion of Hari, is chanted. (There was 
the mark: of) discus on his right palm, and (that of) the 
blossom of lotus on his feet. 

Having ascended the imperial throne, he performed’ a 
Yajna on the bank of the Gang4a with great presentations, 
and with five times fifty sacrificial horses. The powerful 
(king) having made the son of Mamata the priest, tied (for 
Vajna) seven and eighty sacrificial horses on the bank of the 
Jamuna and presented (a large quantity) of wealth. Bharata, 
son of Dushmanta (had) sacredly maintained fire, (and to 
fetch that) the Brahmanas divided amongst themselves (so 
many as) 130,84 cows each. The son of Dushmanta 
(Bharata) surprised the kings by tying (for sacrificial purpose) 
three times thirty hundred horses. He surpassed the wealth 
of. (even) the Gods (because) he had obtained (the favour) 
of Hari. He gave away, in some performances, fourteen 
millions of black elephants with white tusk (the animals) 
covered over with gold. The glorious acts of Bharata were 
never capable of being done before by other kings. (They) 
never could do it,nor will they ever do (it) as (it is impossible) 
to reach the heaven with hands. During (his) world-con- 
quering expedion, (he) defeated the Kirtits, Hunas, Yabanas, 
Poundras, Kankas, Khasas, Saks, and other non-brahmanical 
and un-holy kings. In olden times, the Asuras, having 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM, 79 


defeated the Gods, sent the goddesses to the antipodes, (now 
he) regained them with (other) human beings. In heaven, 
lis subjects had all (their) desires satisfied. (He) sent out 
soldiers on all directions for twenty-seven thousand years. 
The said emperor (then) renounced (his) empire, sovereign 
wealth, undiminished army and his soul (as being unsubs- 
tantial). 

Oh king ! he had three suitable wives (who) ’ came of the 
country (called) Bidarva—(who) afriad of being given up (by 
their husband) killed (their) sons who had no resemblance (to 
their father). His line (going) thus to be extirpated, he 
worshipped, for the purpose (of getting issues born unto him), 
and Maruta gave unto him (a son), Varadwaj (while) Vrihas- 
pati began to have sexual intercourse with (his) brother’s 
wife who was pregnant, he was prevented (by the fectus 
from so doing) and so cursing the foetus, he discharged the 

. seminal fluid. 

Afraid of being forsaken by her husband (as being un- 
chaste) and desirous of giving up the child, Mamata has (thus) 
sung a verse to explain his (child’s) name,.by the Gods :— 
(They said) Oh fool! nurse and support this doubly-born 
(child). (She said) Oh Vrihaspati! you bring up this doubly- 
born (child). 

The father and mother (Vrihaspati and Mamata) having 
gone away thus contending, the said (child came to be called) 
Varadwaja. 

(Although) thus directed by the gods, (Mamata) threw 
away (the child) born of her, considering (it) illegitimately 
born. The Marutas brought him up, and on the line (going 
to be) extirpated, (they) gave him (unto the, king). 


CHAPTER XX. 


4 


as auspicious SUKA said:—The son of Vitatha 
(was) Manyee; and to him were born Vrihad-Kshatra, Jaya, 
Mohavirjya, Naru and Garga. Sankritu was the son of Naru. 
Gura and Rantideva were the sons of Sankritu. The glories 
of Rantideva are sung in this world asin the other. Wealth 
acquired from the skies (i.e. without labour) was given away 
{although he was himself) hungry. Having nothing, shiver- 
ing with (his) relations, the mild (king had to) pass (so many 
as) forty eight days without even (a sip of) drink. 

When on a morning (there) came cakes of unleavened 
bread, clarified butter, curdled milk and water, (and) reached 
the (hands of the king who was) shaking with hunger and 
thirst (and whose) relations were miserable (with hunger), 
there arrived (before him who was) desirous of taking food, a 
guest, a Brahmana. (He the king who was) seeing Hari all 
around divided with respect and attention that food (and made 
a portion of it ever to) him (the guest), and the said twice- 
born (guest) went away (after) having eaten. Now, another 
(guest came to) the king (ready) to partake (of the food) of 
his share, (and the king) thinking of Hari divided (the food 
which had already undergone) desirous and (gave it over) to 
the guest. The Sudra guest having gone away, (there) came 
(another) guest followed by dogs, and (he said) “Oh king ! 
give me food (as also to these my) followers (as we are all) 
hungry. The said (king) with much respect and attention 
gave the remaining (food) to those dogs and the powerful (i.e. 
the Brahmana) and saluted unto (him). A Chandal (then) came 
up (before the kiny, for whom there remained) drinking water 
(which could) quench the thirst of one man only ; and said,— 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. SF 


“Give water unto one who is unholy.” (The king) having 
heard his plaintive voice and of (his) excessive weariness, felt 
compassionate and uttered the following words full of nectar 
(as it were):—“I do not from God desire for the emancipation 
(of soul followed by) the eight-fold richness, or the final eman- 
cipation of soul; (but [ desire that may I) suffer the miseries 
of-various corporeal beings (as though) living in them, so that 
(they may) become free from all misery. By giving the drink 
to the unfortunate being (who) desires to live, all my hunger, 
thirst, weariness, exhaustion, weakness, dullness, bereavement, 
melancholy and illusion will get removed. By saying this, 
the naturally kind-hearted patient thing (although himself) 
dying of thirst, gave (the drink) to the Chandala. The lords 
of the three universe, the givers to the desirous their desire, 
the illusions created by Vishnu appeared (before) him (to test 
his patience and faith). But he, (also was) devoid of all desires 
and attachment, saluted unto them (and) centred (his) mind 
with devotion in the eternal Vagawan Vasudeva, 

Oh king } (before the said king who) had no other desire 
and who had centred his mind in god, the illusions vanished 
away as dreams ; and by the influence of his companionship, 
the followers of Kantideva all became saints devoted unto 
Nardyana. 

To Garga was born Cini; and tohim Garga. From 
Kshatriyas sprang the Brihmands. 

To Mohaviryya was born Duritakshaya. His three sons 
(were) Aruni, Kabi, and Pushkararani, who all attained brah- 
manhood in this world. 

Hasti was the son of Vrihatkshatra, who (built) the city” 
of Hastindpur. Ajamirah, Dwimirah and Purumirah, (were) 
the sons of Hasti. The twice-born, such as Prigamedha and 
others sprang from the line of Ajamirah. Ajamirah (had 
another son called) Vrihadishu, and his son was Vrihatdhwanu, 
to him was born Vrihatakaya, whose son was Jayadratha. His 
son was Vishada and to him was born Syenajit, whose sons 

K 


82 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


were Ruchiracwa, Drichahunu, Kagwa and Batsa. Para was 
the son of Ruchiragwa, and his son was Prithusena. Neepa 
was the son of Para; and be had a hundred sons; (and it was) 
he (who) had begotten Brahmadatta on Kritya, the daughter 
of Suka. 

He (Brahmadatta), who was ascetic, begot on Gabi his wife 
a son by the name of Bishwaksena, (and he) wrote the Yoga 
Shastra at the direction of Jaigishabya. Udaksena was born 
unto him, and his son was Vallata. (These all belong to the 
line of) Vrihadishi. : 

Jabanira was born unto Dwimira, and his son is known as 
Kritiman ; and his son was named Satyadhriti, whose son was 
Drirahnemi, and hisson was Suparcwakrit. Sumati was the 
son of Supargwakrit, and his son was Saunatiman. 

Kriti, the son of Saunatiman, having learnt asceticism 
from Hiranyanabha, divided and learnt the six Sanhitds of 
Prachyasama. His son was Ugraudha, to whom was born 
Kshemy, whose son was Subira and his son was Ripunjaya. 
Bahuratha was the son of Ripunjaya; and his son was Puru- 
mirha, who was childless. 

Ajamirha had, by his wife Nalini, (a son by the name of) 
Neela, whose son was Santi. Susani was the son of Sdnti, and 
unto him was born Puruj3, whose son was Arka. Arka’s son 
was Varasyagwa, and he had five sons,viz., Mudgala, Jabunara, 
Vribadvi¢wa, Kampillan, and Sanjaya. Varmyagwa said—my 

" five sons are capable of protecting the purity of five (different) 
things, and hence they acquired the appellation of Panchala. 

From Mudgala sprang the line of Brahmanas, called Mand- 
gallya. 

To Varmya, the son of Mudgala, were born the twin 
children, of whom Dibadasa was male, and Ahalya was 
female, on whom did Gotama begot Satananda. Satyadhriti 
was the son of Satananda, (and he was) well-versed in the art 
of bow and arrows. His son was Saratban, whose semen got 
discharged at the sight of Urvasi and fell on the woods, from 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. $3 


which was born twin children. Santanu (while) hunting 
out seeing them took compassion (on them) and took (them 
away); the male child (was called) Kripa and the female 
Kripee who became the wife of Drona. 


CHAPTER XXII. 


Te AUSPICIOUS SuKA said :—O king! Maitraéya was the 
son of Divadasa, and his son was Chyabana, to whom was 
born Sudasha and his son was Somaka, the father of Janti. 
He (Somaka) had a hundred sons of whom Prishata was the 
youngest. ‘Unto him was born Drupada possessed of all the 
riches. Draupadi was born nnto Drupada, and unto whom 
were born sons (such as) Dhristadamna and others. Dhrisia- 
ketu was the son of Dhtistadamnu. They all (belonged to the 
line of) Lanchala. 

Another son of Ajamirha (who is calicd) Rhiksha unto 
(him) was born Saubarana; -(who begot) on Tapatee, the 
daughter of the Sun, (a son named) Kuru, the lord of Kuru- 
ksherta. Parikshi, Sudhanu, Janhu, and Nishadha were the 
sons of Kuru. Unto Sudhanu was born Suhotra, whose son 
was Chyabana and unto him was born Kriti. His son was 
Uparicharu Vasu; and to him were born (children) headed 
by Vrihadaratha and others (such as) Kusadmba, Matsya, 
Pratyagra and Shadipa. They were all Chedipas. Unto 
Vrihadaratha was born Kucdgra, and his son was Rhishava, 
and unto him was born Satyahita, and his son was Pushpaban, 
whose son was Jahu. 

Vrihadaratha begot on his other wife the halves of a 
child, who (the halves) were thrown away by their mother ; 


84 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


(and) who, being playfully joined together by Jarasandha 
uttering (the following words) “live, live,” a male child (named 
therefore) Jarasandha came tolive. Unto him (Jurasandha) 
was born Sahadeva, whose son was Som§pi, and his son was 
Sutagraba. 

Parikshi was childless. The son of Janhu was Suratha. 
His son was Vidura, and to him was born Sarbabhouma ; whose 
son was Joyasena. Radhika was the son of Joyasena, whose 
son was Ajutéyu. Akrodhana was the son of Ajaitaya; and 
unto him was born Devatithi. Rhiksha was the son of 
Devatithi and nnto him was born Dileepa; and his son was 
Pratipa. (Pratipa had three sons such as) Devdpi, Santanu 
and Balhika, Devapi repaired into forest forsaking the 
kingdom of his father. Santanu became the king. In tle 
previous life, he was called Mohavisha. Whomever he would 
touch with (his) hands (he) would get youth and peace. On 
account of these deeds, (he was called) Santanu. 

When for twelve years, the god did not rain over his king- 
dom, the Bréhmanas said, “Aggressor (as he is, he is guilty) of 
ascending the throne before his elder brother. “Give unto 
thy elder brother” (the Brahmanas said); “ the kingdom 
without delay for the welfare of thy city and kingdom.’ Be- 
ing thus told by the Brdhmanas,he said to his brother narrating 
the duties of a (born king). But he (Sdntanu’s elder brother) 
having spoken in disparaging terms of the Vedas being de- 
luded by Brahmanas sent by the minister of Santanu, the 
god (of rains) rained. Deva, on the other hand, remains in the 
‘village of Kalapa, practising asceticism. When Soma race 
will be extinct in Kali Yuga, he will revive it. 

Somadatta was the son of Balhika, and his sons were 
Bhurisraba, Bhuri, and Sala. Santanu begot on Ganga Visma, 
who knew the Ego, was the best of those who knew all the 
Dharmas, greatly devoted to Bhagaw4n, learned, the leader of 
the warriors and who pleased in war even Rama, (Parasu- 
rama). - 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 85 


To Santanu were born Chitrangada and Bichitravirya, 
by his wife (known by the name of) Dasakanya. Chitrangada 
was killed by Chitrangada (a Gandharva). 

Paracara begot on her (Dasakanya, whose real name was 
Satyabati) the ascetic Krishna (Krishna Daipayana) who 
was the direct incarnation of the spirit of Hari and in whom 
the Vedas lay potentially. From him (Krishna Daipdyana) 
I have learnt this (Bhagabatam). Vagaw4n Vadarayana dis- 
carding his own disciples such as Paila and others confided 
and taught me, his patient son, this great secret. . 

Bichitravirjya married both Ambika and Ambalikd, the 
daughters of the king of Benares, who were forcibly carried 
off from (the place of) their public choice of husbands. Be- 
ing greatly attached to them, he got Pthisis and died. On 
the field (i.e. the wife) of the childless brother (Bichitravitjya) 
Vadarayana, being requested by mother, begot Dhritarastra, 
Pandu and Vidura. 

O king; Dhritarastra begot on Gandhiri a hundred sons ; 
of whom, Duryodhana was the eldest, and Duhsal&a was the 
daughter. Pandu being prevented by acurse from having ? 
sexual intercourse had three powerful sons, Yudhisthira and 
others, begotten on Kunti by Dharma, Varuna and Indra; 
and on Madri, Nakula and Sahadeva by the Assinikumaras.. 
On Draupadi the (aforesaid) five (brothers) begot each a 
son, who were your ancestors. Unto Yudhisthira was born 
Pratibandhya ; unto Vrikodara, Srutasena ; unto Arjuna,Sruta- 
kirti; unto Nakula, Satanika ; and, O king, unto Sahadeva 
was then born Srutakarma. Yudhisthira begot on Paurabya, 
(a son named) Devaka, and Vimasena begot on Hirhimba 
Ghatotkacha and on Kalya Sarvagata. Sahadeva begot on 
Vijoya the daughter of mountain, (a son named) Suhotra ; 
and Nakula begot on Kuranumati (a son named) Naramitra. 
Then Arjuna begot on Ulapy4, who was given away to the 
Lord of Manipur, (a son named) Babhrubahana. The latter 
was his grand-father’s son. Thy father begotten on Subhadrd 


86 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


by Abhimanya, (and he was) the conqueror of the best of 
charioteers. You were begotten by him (Abhimanya) on 
Uttara. > : 

When the descendants of Kuru were getting extirpated 
by Drona with the weapon (called) Brahmastra, thou wert 
also saved from death and art now living through the grace 
of Krishna. O child1 these (sons) headed by Janamejaya 
are your sons, (and they are) Srutasena, Bhimasena, and the 
powerful Ugrasena, 

Janamejaya having known (that) thou art killed by serpent 
will destroy the serpents in anger by a Yajna for the destruc- 
tion of serpents. In time, this son (Janamejaya) having 
conquered the whole world will perform Aswamedha YAjna 
by making Tura the priest, (and he will) perform other 
Yajnas. His son, Satanika, will learn the Vedas with Yajna- 
valka and the military science and knowledge of the rites 
with Saunaka. His son will be Sabasranika and his son 
Aswamedhaja. Unto him will be born Aseemakrishna and 
unto him Nemichakra who will dwell in (the village of) Kan- 
cambi when (the city of) Hastindpur will.be stolen (2. e., 
washed away) by the river. His son will be Upt& and unto 
him will be born Chitraratha, and unto him Suchiratha; and 
unto him Bristiman, and unto him Sushena, the Emperor. Unto 
him will be born Suneetha, and unto him Nrichaksha, and unto 
him Sukhinala; and unto him Pariplaba, and his son (will be 
called) Medhabi. His son (would be) Nripanjaya, unto him 
will be born Durba and unto him Timi, unto him Vrihadratha, 
unto him SatAnika, the son of Sudasa. Unto Satanika~ will 
be born Durbamana, and unto him Mabinara, to whom (would 
be born) Dandap4ni, his son Nimi and unto him will be born 
Kshemaka. In Kad? (Yuga), the line of Brahma-Kshatriyas, 
purified by the gods and the Munis, will, having not Kshemaka 
as (their) king, get extirpated. 

Now J describe unto thee, the kings of Magadha who will 
come to be. Marjari will be born unto Sahadeva, and unto him 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 37 


Srutacraba, and unto him Yutayu and unto him will be born 
Naramitra. His son (will be) Sunakshatra and unto him 
Brihatasena, and unto him Karmajit, and unto him Sutanjaya 
and unto him Bipra and his son would be Suchi. Unto Suchi 
will be born Kshema; and unto him Subrata; and unto him 
Dharmasutra ; and unto him Sama. His son will be Drirha- 
sena; and unto him Sumati; and unto him will be -born 
Subala ; and unto him Sunitha, whose son (will be) Satyajit, 
and unto him (will be born) Vigwajit and unto him Ripun- 
jaya. 

These descendants of Vrihadratha will be kings for a 
thousand years, 


CHAPTER XXIII 


aa had three sons (vzz.) Sabhanara, Anagchakshu and 
Paregkshu. Unto Sabhanara was born Kalanara, and unto 
him Srinjaya, and unto him Janamejaya, and unto him 
Mohagala; and unto him Mobamana. Uginara and Titikshu 
were born unto Mohdmana. Ucinara had four sons (wviz,) 
Sibi, Barbura, Krimi, and Daksha. Sibi had four sons, 
Vrishadarva, Subira, Madra, and Kekaya, having knowledge 
of the Zgo, Rushadratha was the son of Titikshu; and unto 
him was born Homa; and unto him Vali. On the field of 
Vali was begotten by Dirghatama kings called Anga, Banga, 
Kalinga and Sumbha, Pundra, Andhra and others. They 
founded six kingdoms after their own names in the eastern 
country. 

Khalapina was born unto Anga; and unto him was born 
Dibiratha; whose son was Dharmaratha; and unto him 


88 ; SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


Chitraratha, who was childless. He was known as Ramapada 
and Dasaratha, his companion, gave unto him his own 
daughter whom Rhishyasringa married. 

The Gods not having rained (for a considerable time), 
the females by dance, song, music, embraces, and 
luscivous deportments brought him (Rhishyasringa). He 
(Rhishyasringa) found the king childiess and performed 
Yajnas; securing him children, and gave him issues. By 
which (also) the childless Dasaratha gained children. 

Chaturanga was born unto Romapada; and his son 
was Prithutaksha; and unto him were born Vrihadratha, 
Vrihatakarm4, and Vrihatbhanu. Unto Adya was born 
Vrihanmand; and unto him Joyadratha; and uuto him 
Vijaya; and unto him Dhriti; and unto him Dbritabrata ; 
and unto him Satkarma; and unto him Adhirathi, who, 
while playing on the banks of the Ganga, (rescued) the child 
from the dreds thrown there by Kunti. Being childless, he 
(Adhiratha) adopted it as his child. The son of king Karna 
was Vrishasena. The son of ,Drudjhyo was Babhra and 
unto him was born Setu; unto him was born Arabdha; and 
unto him Gandhara ; and unto him Dharma, whose son was 
Dhrita. Unto Dhrita was born Durmada, and unto him 
Pracheta. The hundred sons of Pracheta became kings, in 
the northern countries, of the Yavanas. 

. Banhi was the son of Tarbushu and unto him was born 
Varga, and unto him Vanuman, and his son was Trivanu, 
and his son was the noble-minded Karandhama. Unto him 
was born Marutha who was childless, and he (therefore) 
adopted (Dushmanta) of the line of the Purus as his son. 
The said Dushmanta, desirous of kingdom, regained his own 
line. © 

O the best of men! I (now) describe (unto thee) the 
lirie of Jadu, the eldest son of Yajati, (a line which) greatly 
holy and wipes away all the sins of mankind. People get 
absolved from all sins on hearing of the line of Jadu wherein 


a 


SRIMADBHACABATAM. 89 


Bhagawan, Universal Soul, incarnated Himself in the form of 
man. 

__ It is said that Jadu had four sons, viz., Sahasrajit, Krostu, 
Nala and Ripu. Satajit was the son of Sahasrajit, unto whom 
were born Moh&hya, Renukya and Haihaya. Unto Haihaya 
was born Dharma; and unto him Netra, and unto him Kunti, 
and unto him was born Sohanjari, and unto him Mohishman, 
and unto him Bhadrasena. Durmada and Dhanaka were 
sons of Bhadrasena; and unto Dhanaka were born Krita- 
virjya, Kritagni, Kritaurma, Kritanja. Arjuna was the 
son of Kritavirjya and was the lord of seven islands, and 
learnt Yoga of considerable merit from Dattatreya of the 
line of Hari; and certainly no other kings will attain the 
perfection of the son of Kritavirjya by (the practice of) 
Yajna, charity, asceticism, Yoga, and study of the Vedas. 
He enjoyed with unabated strength the objects (of gratifica- 
tion for) the six senses for fifty thousand years, and (his) 
wealth did not (suffer any) diminution. Of his thousand sons, 
Joyadhwaja, Surasena, Vrishana, Madhu, and Urjita were 
killed in battle. Talajangha, the son of Joyadhwaja, had 
a hundred sons, who were all, being known as TA4lajangha, 
killed by the power of Sagara. Of them the eldest was 
Bitihotra ; and Vrishni is known as’ the son of Madhu, and 
he had a hundred sons. O king! from Vrishni sprang 
the line which is (also) known as Madhava, Vrishni and 
Jadava. The son of Jadu was Krostu and his son was 
Brijinaban ; and unto him was born Swahita and his son 
was Vicadgu, and unto him was born Chitraratha ; and unto 
him was born Sasabinda, the great ascetic, the great and 
the highly fortunate, (and) he was invincible, and lord of 
fourteen (different marks of) invaluable jewels. He had ten 
thousand wives; and he begot on them ten thousand /akhs 
ef sons, (all) greatly famous. Of the six of these (sons) who 
were famous, Prithusruta had ason (named) Dharma, and 
his son was Ushan&, who performed a hundred Aswamedha 

L 


90 .SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 

Yajnas. His son was Ruchaka; and he had five sons, and 
hear of them,—Purujit, Rukma, Rukmeshu, Prithu and Jya- 
magha. Although Jyamagha was childless, he did dot marry 
another wife for the excessive fear of Saiby4. (Once ona 
time, he) stole away a girl (named) Bhoja, from the house 
‘of Indra. Having seen her in the chariot, Saibya being 
angry said— Who is it? Whom have you, imposter, placed 
on the chariot in my place?’ She is thy daughter-in-law 
(was said by Jyamagha)- This being said, she said in asto- 
nishment—I am barren, and I have no sister-wife ; how then 
can “my daughter-in-law” be applicable tome? O queen! 
she will marry whom thou wilt bring forth ; and this expres- 
sion) was approved of by the Viswadevas and the Fathers. 
In course of time Saibya became pregnant and brought forth 
a good child, who came to be known as Vidarbha and ‘mar- 
tied the chaste daughter-in-law (i.e. Bhojy4). 


CHAPTER XXIV. 


Lee AUSPICIOUS SUKA said :—Vidarbha begot on her 
(Bhojy4) sons, named Kusa and Kratha. His third son 
was Romapada, who belonged to the line of Vidarbha. 
Babhru was the son of Romapada; and unto him was 
born Kritu; and unto him was born Usika and unto 
him were born kings, Chedi, Chaidya and others. Kunti 
was the son of Kratha, and his son was Vrishni, and 
his son was Nibriti and unto him was born (a son), named 
Dasirha, and his son was Byoma, whose son was Jimoota, 
whose son was Bikriti; and unto him was born Bhimaratha. 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. gt 


Navaratha was the son of Bhimaratha, and his son was 
Dasaratha, whose son was Sakuni, and unto him was born 
Karambhi, whose son was Devaratha. Then Devakshata 
was born unto him, and his son was Madhu, whose son was 
Kurubasa. Puruhotra was son of Tanu, and his son was 
Ayu, and his son was Satwata. Satw&ta had seven sons (v2z.) 
Vajamana , Vaji, Dibya, Vrishni, Devabridha, Andhaka, and 
Mohabhaja. Oh Lord, Vajamdna had Nimlochi, Kinkana, 
and Dhristi by one wife ; and by another wife he had three 
(other) sons (v7z.) Satajit, Sahasrajit and Ajutajit. Babhru 
was the son of Devabridha; and the following verse is sung 
about them :—What we hear from distance is (just) what we 
see from near. Babhru is the best of human beings and 
Devabridha is like the gods. Five, sixty, six thousand, and 
eight persons (4 e. persons with’ these appellations) gained 
immortality on account of Babhru and Devabridha. 

Mohabhoja was very much religiouly disposed ; and the 
Vajas belong to his line. Ob, the suppressor of the enemies ! 
Sumitra and Yudhajit were (sons) born unto Vrishni. Sint 
‘and Anamitra were born .unto Yudhajit, and unto Anamitra 
was born Nighna. Then Nighna had two sons—Satrajita 
and Prasena. Another son of Anamitra (called) Sini had 
Satyaka as his son. 

Yujudhana was born unto Satyaki, and his son was Joya, 
and his son was Kuni. Anamitra had another son Vrishni; 
whose sons were Safalka and Chitraratha. It is said that 
Safalka begot on Gaudhini twelve sons, Akrura and others.” 
(Their names are) Asanga, Sadrameya, Mridura, Mriduri, 
Siri, Dharmabridha, Sukarma, Khatrapeksha, Arimardana, 
Satrughna, Gandhamadana, and Pritibaha; and they had a’ 
sister by the name of Suchara. 

Akrura had two sons, Devaban and Upadeva. Chitraratha 
had many sons, such as Prithu, Vidura and others. They all 
belonged to the line of Vrishni. Kukura, Bhajamana, Suchi, 
Kambala and Barhisha (were the sons of Andhaka). Vrishni 


92' SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


was the son of Kukura, and his son was Biloma, whose son 
was Kopolaroma, and his son was Anu, whose companion 
was Tumburu. Dundubhi was bora unto Andhaka, and his 
son was Avidya, whose son was Punarvasu, and his son was 
Ahuka and daughter Ahuki. Ahuka had two sons, Devaka 
and Ugrasena. Devaka had four sons, Devaban, Upadeva, 
Sudeva, and Devavardhana. Oh king! the four (brothers) had 
seven sisters (such as) Dhritadeva, Santideva, Upadeva, 
Sridevi, Devarakshité, Sahadeva and Devaki. Vasudeva 
married them all. 

Kangsa, Sunéma, Nyagrodka, Kanka, Sanku, Sahu, 
Rashtrapala, Dhristi and Tushtiman were the sons of Ugra- 
sena ; and Kangsa, Kangsavati, Kanka, Suruva, and Rashtra- 
palika were the daughters of Ugrasena. The younger 
brothers of Vasudeva married them all. 

Sura was the son of Viduratha, and his son was Bhajamana, 
and his son was Sini, whose son was Bhoja, and his son was . 
Hridika whose sons were Devamirha, Satadhanu and Krita- 
varma. Devamirha’s son was Sura, whose son was Marista. 
Sura begot on her ten sinless sons, (such as) Vasudeva, 
Devabhaja, Devasrabasa, Anaka, Srinjaya, Syamaka, Kanka, 
Samika, Batsaka and Brika. When Vasudeva was born, the 
gods sounded the drums, and he was the substitute of Hari. 
(He is accordingly) called Anakadundubhi. Pritha, Srutadeva, 
Srutakirti, Srutasraba, and Rajadhidevi were the five daugh- 
ters (of Sura), who were their (¢.e. of the ten brothers’) 
sisters. Sura the father (of Pritha) gave Pritha unto Kunti, 
his friend, who was childless. Ske gained from Durvasa, 
whom she pleased, the means of invoking the Gods. Being 
holy, she invoked the sun to test the power of the AM/antra. 
The God appeared before her ; and having seen the god with 
astonishment, (she said) “I applied the (Mantra) to test (its 
powers). Oh God} pardon me and go your way.” (The god 
said), the visit with the Gods is not fruitless, I will beget 
‘on youason. Oh beautiful waisted! I shall see that thy 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 93 


maiden-hood may not be questioned. Then the God, Sun, 
having impregnated her, went away. She was forthwith 
delivered of a child like the second Sun. Being afraid of 
public censure, she threw it into the waters of the river. 
Satyavikrama Pandu, the grand father, married her. Vridha- 
sarma of the-line of Karusha married Srutadeva, from whom 
was born, being cursed, Muni Dantabakra, the son of Diti- 
Dhristaketu of the line of Kaikceya married Srutakirti and unto 
her were born five sons, (such as) Santardun and others, all 
belonging to the line of Kaikeya. 

Joyasena begot on Rajadhidevi (two sons of the name of) 
Binda and Anubinda. 

Damughosha, the king of the Chedis, married Srutasrab3. 
Sisupala was her son, whose son was Katitha. 

Devabhaga begot on Kangs8, Chitraketu and Vrihatbala. 
Devasraba begot on Kangsabati Subira and Ishuman. Kanka 
begot on Kanké, Satyajit Purujit and Baka. 

Srinjaya begot ou Rashtrapalya Vrisha, Durmarshan and 
others. Syamaka begot on Surabhumi Harikesa aud Hirana- 
kshya. Batsaka begot on Apsara Misrakesi, Brika and 
others. Brika begot on Durhaksha Taksha, Pushkaraméli 
and others. Samika begot on Sudamini Sumitra, Arjuna- 


' pala and others. Anaka begot on Karnika Rhitadhdma and 


Jaya. 

Anakadundhubhi had (many) wives (such as) Paurabi, 
Rohini, Bhadramodira, Rochana, Ila, Devaki and others. 
Vasudeva begot on Rohini Bala, Gadasarana, Durmada, 
Bipula, Dhruba, Krita and others; on Paurabi (he begot) 
twelve sons, Subhadra, Bhadrabahu, Durmada, Bhadra and 
others; on Modira (he begot) Nanda, Upananda, Kritaka, 
Sura and others. Kausaly4 was delivered of a child Kasi, 
the delight of the family. From Rochana were born Hasta, 
Hemangada and others. From Ila were born Uru, Balka 
and other best Jadus. Vasudeva begot on Dhristadeva one 
son, Biprishta. Oh king the sons of Santideva were Pra- 


94- SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


sama, Prathila and others. Upadeva had ten sons such as 
Rajanya, Kalpa, Varsha and others. Srideva had six sons, 
Vasu, Hanga, Subangsa and others. Devarakshita had nine 
sons, Gada and others. Vasudeva begat on Devaki eight 
sons (such as) Kirtiman, Sushena, Bhadrasena, Rija, Sang- 
mardana, Bhadra, Abiswara and Sankarsana. Oh king! 
their (Vasudeva and Devaki’s) eighth son was Hari Himself, 
and unto them was born Subhadra, the highly fortunate, who‘ 
was thy paternal grandmother. 

Whenever (there is) loss of Dharma and increase of sin, 
Vagawan, God Hati, then incarnates Himself. (There is) no 
reason for the birth and act of the Lord of uuiverse (except) 
to see (save) the created immersed in his own illusions. 
Whose inclination towards (creative) illusion is for the bene- 
fit of the people, is the sole cause of evolution and preservation 
(of this world) and is for the final emancipation of the soul 
(of people). (The said tendency towards creative illusion 
on the part of God is) for the removal of the weight (of sin 
from the earth (in consequence) of the attack of the Asuras, 
the lords of many Akshauhinis, (and who are) possessed of . 
(all the) marks of royalty.. Vagawan Madbusudana easily 
performs those acts (which) the lords of the Gods cannot . 
even conceive in (their mind). For the favour of the votaries «. 
who will be born in the Kali Yuga the Lord has spread his 
holy fame destructive of grief, sorrow and ignorance. That 
fame is like unto ambrosia to the ears of the pious and the 
foremost of shrines; one drinking it once with the ear-hke 
cavity of palms, becomes capable of renouncing all actions. 
Therefore all men of the races of Bhoja, Vrishni, Andhaka, 
Madhu, Surasena, Dasharha, Kara, Srinjaya and Pandu 
speak highly of the character of the Lord. The Lord de- 
lighted all people with his smiling look, liberal words, heroic 
sports and with his limbs and charming form. His counte- 
nance was shining with Makara Kundalas, graceful cars and 
tenders and smiling cheeks which created festivities as if 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 95 


every day. Men and women were not satiated with drink- 
ing that countenance with their looks ; they were delighted 
but angry with Nimi. He was born first in his own form; 
then he went to Vrajain a human form; destroying the 
enemy those of he increased the prosperity of the inhabitants 
of Vraja. And taking many wives and creating progeny by 
hundreds he extended his own Vedic ways in the human 
society and adored his own self with profuse sacrifices. 
Then relieving the earth of her heavy burden created by 
Kali appearing in the end, he made the Kuru army tremble 
with his looks. BeholdingiArjuna’s victory, announcing it 
and instructing Uddhava in great truth he repaired to his 
own region. 


End OF BooK IX. 


0o— 


A 


PROSE ENGLISH TRANSLATION 


OF 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM. 


es 9 SEDI OO 


EDITED AND PUBLISHED BY 
MANMATHA NATH DUTT, MA.., M.R.A.S. 


uthor of the English Translations of the Ramayana, Vishnu- 
puranam, Gila and other works. 


Printep By H.C. Dass, 
Exysium Press, 65/2 Beapon STREET. 


CALCUTTA: 


1895. 


BOOK X. 


CONTENTS. 


Cuarrer 1.—Suka speaks of the incarnation of Vishnu as Vasudeva: 
the destruction of Devaki’s sons by Kansa.—P. I. 

Carrer lI.—The appearance of the Deity in Devaki’s womb: the 
God commands the godess of illusion to take away the embryo from 
Devaki’s womb to that of Rohini : celestials adoring the Deity.—P. 8. 

Cuaprter I[1.—The birth of the Deity : Vasudeva’s prayer : Devaki's 
er: Vasudeva takes the child Krishna across the river and gives it to 
hoda, and brings her daughter.—P: 13. 

Cuaprer IV.—Kansa destroys Devaki’s daughters : Devaki’s lamen- 
ions: the consultation of the Daityas.—P. 19. 

(CHAPTER V.—The. conversation between Nanda and Vasudeva. 
24. 

Cuaprer VI.—The Destruction of Putana.—P. 27. 

Cuaprer VII.—Miracles of Krishna’s life: the destruction by him of 
te demon Trinavarta : he shows by yawning the universe to Yashoda.— 
. 32. 

Cuapter VIII.—Garga goes to Vraja; he names the child; he 
nes the child of Rohini Rama: the childish plays of Krishna and 
ma.—P. 37. , 

Cuaprer IX.—A miracle: Krishna throws up the mortar. P. 42. 
Carrer X.—Another miracle : the breaking of thé trees.—P. 44. 
Cuarrer XI.—The destruction of a demon under the guise of a calf: 
the destruction of the demon Vaka.—P. 48. 

Cuaprer XII.—The destruction of a demon in the shape of a 
serpent.—P. 53. 

Cuaerer XIII.—The destruction of the! infatuation of Brahma.— 
P, 57. ° 

Cuaprer XTV.—The eulogy of Krishna by Brahma.—P. 63. 

CHAPTER XV.—The destruction of Dhenuka.—73. 

CHAPTER XVI.—The destruction of the serpent demon Kalya.— 
P. 79. 

Cuaprer XVIJ.—The congratulation of the inhabitants of Vraja for 
Krishna's release from Kalyas grasp.—P. 88. 


pr: 


se 


i 


Cuapter XVIII.—The destruction of the Asura Pralamva.—P. go. 

Cuarpter XIX—The forest fire: the release of the boys by Krishna. 
~—P. 95. 

Cuarter XX.—Description of the rainy season and the autumn.—~ 
P. gs. 

Cuaprer XXI.—Singing of the milk-women.—P. 100. 

Carter XXII.—The adoration of the goddess by the milk-women : 
Krishna takes away the clothes of the milk-women and climbs on a tree. 

*—P. 104. 

Cuarrer XXI11.—The adoration of the Brahmanas and the sacrifices. 
P. 108. 

Cuarrer XXIV.—The sacrifice of Indra is stopped by Krishna’s 
advice and the cow-herds are induced to worship the Mountain.—P. 112, 

Cuarrer XXV.—Krishna upholds the mountrin Goverdhana, and 
saves the people from being inundated.—P. 118. 


Cuarrer XXVI.—The cow-herds communicate to Nanda 
prowess of Krishna: Nanda, too, informs them about the divinity of t 
child as headed by him from Garga.—P. 121. 


Cuaprer XXVIL.—The adoration of Krishna by Suravi and Indra 
P, 124. 

Carter XXVIII.—The imprisonment of Vasudeva by Varuna ;. an 
his release by Krishna.—P. 128. 

Cuaprer XXIX.—Krishna begins the pastime of Rasa.——P. 130. 

Ciraprer XXX.—The pangs of separation suffered by milk-women, 
P. 136. 

CuarteR XXXI.—The song of the milk-women. P. 141. 

Crarrer XXXI1.—The consolation to milk-women given by Sri 
Krishna P. 144. 

Cuaprer XXXII}.—Rasa-Yata of Krishna.—P. 147. 

Cuarrer XXXI1V.--The destruction of the serpent, and the release of 
Sudarshana.—152. 

CHAPTER XXXv.—~The lamentation of the milk-women for the absence 
© Krishna.— P. 156. 

Crtapter xxxvi.—The destruction of the’ Asura Aristha’: the despach 
of Keshi by Kansa to Vraja to destroy Rama and Keshava.—P. 159 


CHApTER XXXvii—The destruction of Keshi.—P. 164, 
CHAPTER Xxxvill.—Akrura goes to Vraja—P. 168. 
Cuarrer xXxxix.—The lamentation of the milk-women on the approacl. 
nog departure of Krishna~P. 173. 
Curerer xt.—\krura sings Lord’s praise.—P. 179. 


ese 


31) 


Craprer xtt—-Akrura with Krishna arrives at Mathura: Krishna's 
decoration by Dasherman and others.—P. 183. 

CHAPTER XLUI.—The arrangement of the tournament—P. 189. 

Cuaprer xuii.—The fighting begins: Kansa asks Krishna and 
Rama to fight with the elephant: the elephant is killed by them : people 
eulogise their exploits ; the wrestler Chanura invites them to fight—P. 93. 

CHAPTER XLiv.—They destroy both Chanura and Kansa. Kam’s 
wives then bewail.—197. 

Cwarrer xiv.—Krishna consoles his mother Devaki and makes 
Ugrasena the king of the Yadus : Sandipani asks Krishua to bring his 
son from the ocean. The destruction of Panchajana.—P. 202. 

~CaaPTER Xuvt--Uddhava goes to Gokula at Krishna’s request: 
s wel-come by Nanda.——P.-.206. 

CHAPTER xLv11.—Uddhava gives.the news to the milk-women.—P. 211. 

CuapterR XLvitt.—Uddhava's return.—P, 215. 

Cuarrer xi1x.—The Lord pleases Sairindri.—P.218. 

CuapTer L.—Akrura goes to Hastinapur and sounds Dhritarastra,-— 
P, 221. 

Cuarter LI.—The queens of Kansa inform their father Jarasandha 
bf Kansa’s death: he comes to fight with Krishna; and is defeated : 
Krishra builds a port on the ocean.—P. 224. 

CuapTer LII.—The account of Muchukunda : he 
—P. 228. 

Cuaprer LITL.—Rukmini sends a messenger to Krishnay--P. 234. 

Cuarrer LIV.—Krishna goes to her.—P. 238. 

Cuaprer LV.—Krishna carries away Rukmini by force akd marri 
Ker.—P. 242. 

Cuaptar LVI.—The story of Pradyumna.—P. 247. 

Cuaprer LVII.—The account of the jewel Swamantaka.—P. 25% 

Cuarter LVIN.—Krishna ys’ Satadhananan. P. 254. 

Cuaprer LLX,—Krishna goes to the Pandavas: he marries oth 
wives.—P. 257. 

Cuarrer LX,—The destruction of the demon Naraka. Krishna 
tdarries all the wives of Naraka, and returns to Aditi her ear-rings.— 
P. 262. 

CuarTer tx1.—Conversation berween Rukmini and Krishna. 
P. 266. a 

Carrer txtt.—The progeny of Krishna.—P. 271. 

CuHarrer ixitr.—The account of Vana: how he grows powerful : 
his daughter dreqms a man—Anniriddha, the descendant of Vadus is 
taken to hee by het companion,—P. 275. 


logises Krishna 


| } 


Iv. 


CuHaArTer txiv.—Krishna and Rama go to release Vana: Rudra 
comes to fight with them.—P. 278. 

CuHaPTeR Lxv.—The story of the king Nriga.—P. 282. 

Cuarrer Lxvi.—Balarama goes to Gokula and draws the ocean.— 
P. 286. 

CHAPTER Lxvil.—The destruction of Poundraka and the king of 
Kasi,—P. 288. 

CHAPTEB Lxvitt.—The destruction of Dvivida.—P. 292. 

Cuarrer txix.—Samva carries away the daughter of the king 
Duryodhana : the Kurus capture him ; and Rama defeats them.--P. 294. 

CHAPTER LXx.—Narada comes to meet Krishna.—298. 

CuarTer Lxx1.—The kings oppressed by Jarasn=#na send an eme, 
sary to Krishna.—P. 302. 

Cuarrer LXXII.—Srikrishna goes to Indraprastha—P. 307. ~ 

CHAPTER LXxxti1.—The destr-ction of Jarasandha—P. 312. 

CHAPTER Lxx1v.—He leases the kings imprisoned by Jara 
sandha—P. 317. 

CHAPTER Lxxv.—T?'e destruction of Sisupala—P,. 321. 

Cuaprer txxv1,—’ The celebrtion of the Rajshuya.—p. 326. 

CHAPTER Lxxvi}+—The arrangement for the destruction of Salva. 
P. 331. 

CHAPTER rx Attt.—The destruction of Salva—P. 334- 

Cuarrer y-XXtX.—The destruction of other Asuras.—P. 333- 

Cuarter! txxx.—Balarama goes to visit the shrines—P. 212- 
CuaprpR Lxxxt.—The story of the Brahmana Sridama—P. 346. 
Cuar/fER LXxx11.—The same story continued.—P. 351- r 
SPTER LXxxtit.—Krishna goes to Kurukshetra.—P. 355- 


BOOK xX. 


CHAPTER J. 


On t Salutations unto Krishna. 
“THE AUSPICIOUS MONARCH said:—O foremost of the 
sages! thou hast related.unto us a detailed account of the 
dynasties sprung from the sun andthe moon, as also the 
wonderful characters of the kings born in these two dynas- 
ties. Thou hast also spoken in detail about the descendants 
of the virtuous Yadu. Dothou now describe unto us, the 
deeds of Vishnu, who incarnated himself by a part in the 
last-mentioned dynasty. Rehearse unto us in detail, the 
acts performed by the almighty Lord, the protector of beings 
hnd the soul of the universe, when he took his birth inthe 
race of Yadu. Save and except a slaughterer ora suicide, 
te: dever desists fron listenins to a recital/of the 
an atten- 
painst (the 
d the mind, 


2 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


capable of conquering the gods in battle. When this body 
of mine—that is now instrumental in begetting progeny on 
the race of the Kurus and the Pandavas—had been burning 
inside my mother’s womb. with the weapon of the son of 
Drona, that discus-handed Divinity, entering there, preserved 
it, as also that of my mother who had sought protection in 
Him. O learned sage! recount to us the wonderful deeds 
of that one, who assumed human form through his energy 
of illusion and who, in the form of the Purusha and the des- 
troyer, is ever meting out mortality or immortality to cor, 
poreal beings, according to their worldly propensities o 
spiritual insight. Thou hast said that Saxkarsana (Réma) i 
the son of Rohini. How was he then born in the womb o 
Devaki without previously tunder-going death? What f, 
did the Great One, the bestower of emancipation, trav 
all the way from the residence of his father to Braja? Where 
did that lord of devotees settle down with his kinsmen? 
What did Kesava do, when he lived in Braja, as also 
when he lived in Madhupuri? Why did he himself slay 
Kansa, the brother of his mother, and therefore not metiting 
death by his hands? Assuming a human form, how many 
years did he live inthe city of the Yadus, in company with the 
Vrishnis ? What was the number of the wives of that Great 
One? O sage! O omniscient one! it behoveth thee t 
relate in detail to my regardful self, these and all other 
deeds of Krishna. Though I have given up drinking water, 
yet, this insufferable hunger does not at all oppress me, for 
I am drinking the nectareous accounts of Hari dropping from 
thy lotus-like face. 

THe auspicious SUTA said:—O son of Vrigu! hearing 
these very proper questions, the foremost of the devotees 
of the Lord, the almighty son of Vy4sa, praising the king, 

athe favoured one of Vishnu, began to relate the biceraphy 
‘of “Krishna, (an andition of) which is capable of destroying 
the sin that is predominant during the age of Kali. 


7 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM, § 


THE AUSPICIOUS SUKA said :—-O foremost of godly mon- 
archs! thy understanding hath attained to a singleness of 
purpose; therefore a definite predilection for hearing the 
accounts regarding Vasudeva, hath grown in thee. Questions 
regarding the accounts of Vasudeva, surely purify these 
three classes of people,—namely, ‘who put them (questions) 
who answer them and who hear them,—like unto the waters 
of the Ganges flowing from His feet. 

When numerous Daityas were born on this earth 
under the guise of arrogant kings, she (this earth) op- 


pressed under the heavy burthen of their warlike hosts, 


sought shelter in Brahma. Assuming the form of a cow, 
qwith tears rolting down her cheeks, depressed and pi- 
,teously bewailing, she approached near the Creator, and 


apprised him of her danger. Thereupon Brahm4, being 


informed of her calamity, accompanied by the three-eyed 
God, and with the celestials and with-her (earth), repaired to the 
banks of the ocean of milk. There, with perfect concentra- 
tion, he began to worship the Purusha, the Lord of the 


Universe, the god of gods, the _bestower of all objects of 
desire, uttering the hymn called the e Purushasuhla. ® Then the’ 


creator, i in his contemplation, hearing a voice resounding in the 
{ heavens, thus spoke unto the celestials -—-‘Oimmortals ! listen 
[to the words of the Purusha which have been heard by me; and 
athen without the Jeast delay, act according to them. Even 
enefore this (our appeal) the Lord hath come to know of 
the affliction, the goddess of Earth is suffering from. Do ye 
inwell, incarnating yourselves by parts, among the race of the 
bVadus, until the Lord of Lords traverseth the Earth after 
* freeing her of all burthens, by his Energy of Time. Ere 
long, he supreme Purusha himself, the Almighty one, shall 
be born in the family of Vasudeva. So, let the divine dam- 
Sels take birth to minister to his comforts The God Ananta 


* The ninetieth hymn of the tenth Mandala of the Rig Veda, regarded as | 


of very sacred bie; 


Mw? crc ffi 


ett ( : y an i 2) 


yu 


4 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


a portion of the illustrious Vasudeva, his’constant companion, 
and the thousand-mouthed serpent, shall be born in the first 
instance to perform the favourite acts of Hari. The almighty 
(goddess of the) illusive energy of Vishnu; capable of para- 
lysing this universe, will also partly incarnate herself, com- 
manded by the Lord to do so, to fulfill his missions on Earth.’* 

THE AUSPICIOUS SUKA continued :—Thus speaking unto 
the immortals, and consoling the goddess of Earth by his 
speech, the creator, the Lord of the Prajapatis, repaired to 
his own splendid regions, 

In the days of yore, there lived in the city of Mathur 
a ruler of the Yadus, by name Surashena. This king reigne 
over Mathura, Surashena and many other countries. That 
time forward, this city became the metropolis of all the 
monarchs of the Vadu dynasty. In this city ever dwelleth 
the almighty Lord Hari. Once upon a time, Vasudeva 
a descendant of the kingly line of Suva, married the princess 
of this city. Onthe day following the marriage, he, with 
his newly-married bride by name Devaki, ascended his car 
to repair to his own residence. Desirous of pleasing his 
sister, Kansa the son of Ugrasena (the king of the city), 
took the reins of the horses of the car, and surrounded by 
hundreds of golden chariots, drove away. At the time of 
their departure king Devaka, greatly affectionate towards 
his daughter, gave her as a wedding present, four hundre 
elephants caparisoned with golden chains, fifteen thousan 
horses, eighteen hundred chariots, and two hundred youthfu 
maid-servants adorned with various ornaments. O son 
at the time of the departure of the bridegroom and _ bride} 
for their welfare, conches were blown; and TZuryyas, 
Mridangas and kettle-drums were simultaneously struck up. 

When Kansa had been driving on the road holding the 
reins, an incorporeal voice addressing him said: “O ignorant 
one! the eighth issue of this lady whom thou art even now 
driving, shall be thy slayer.’ Thus spoken to, the crooked 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 5 


and sinful Kansa, the disgrace to his race, ready to slay 
his sister grasped his sword and seized her by the hair. 
The illustrious Vasudeva, trying to appease that one of 

disgraceful deeds, of cruel nature, and devoid of bashfulness, 

said; ‘Thou art glory to the race of the Bhojas; and the 
Suras are proud of thy qualifications. It behoveth thee 

not to kill thy helpless sister, even during the celebration of 

her marriage-festivities. O hero! death is born ‘with the 

bodies of those who have taken birth. This day or at the 

end of a hundred years hence-forward, death is sure to come 

living beings. When this body is on the. verge of being 
issolved into its five constituent ingridients, the soul en- 
ntined in it, in consequence of its deeds and paralysed, as- 
sumes another corpus; and then leaves behind the old one. 
Tust as a man walks by putting the whole weight of his body 
on one leg and then advancing on the other, just as a leech 
catching hold of a new blade of grass lets go its former sup- 
port, in the same manner, the soul travelling in the path of ac- 
tions transmigrates from one body to another. A man whose 
heart has been engrossed by an eager desire for wealth, 
seems to enjoy it in his dream with a body like unto his 
real one; as also intently brooding in his mind over the 
things heard and seen, he seems to realise them in his dream. 
ut surely when awake all his experiences during a dream 
re buried in oblivion. Whatsoever structure, made by the 
nergy of Hlusion out of the five elements, the mind—the 
product of Evolution—goaded by pristine deeds, may run 

nto, the soul, considering itself identical with mind, is— 
»0rn with the latter. The soul, located inside the structures 

created by its own energy of Illusion, is befooled by 
following the passions, even as the moon and other planets 
reflected on water and other fluids seem to vibrate, in 

consequence of the air disturbing them (the fluids). 
Therefore a person, desirous of securing his own welfare, 
should not oppress any body. An oppressor has reason to 


6 ” SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


‘pe afraid of others, of the god of Death, and of the relatives 
of the oppressed person. This damsel is thy younger sister 
and is miserable, and ought to cherished as thy own 
daughter. Thou art affectionate to the miserable. It 
behoveth thee not to slay this blessed ladys.’ 

THE AUSPICIOUS SUKA went on:—O foremost of the 
descendants of Kuru inspite of his being advised in 
concilliatory as well as frightening language, the heartless 
Kansa, following the examples of the cannibals did not ! 
desist (from killing his sister). Finding him obstinately 
bent on perpetrating the vile deed, Vasudeva began t 
think. After a short while he fixed upon this means 
preventing him (Kansa). ‘An intelligent being ought to pre’ 
vent murder as long as power and reason are left to him. Bu 
even then, if murder cannot be adverted, no blame ought 
to fall to his share. So, promising to give over to this 
murderous wretch all my sons, I shall now liberate this 
afflicted damsel, When sons will be born to me, then let the 
inevitable take its course; or this one may die before I am 
blessed with any issue; if he does not die, is it not possible 
for the inevitable course of Destiny to change? But I 
‘shall avert the present calamity. Averted if it returns, I 
am not to blame. Just as there is no other cause except 
pure chance for fuel catching fire or escaping it, so except in 
conceivable Fate there is no other cause for persons being 
connected with bodies or separated from them!’ Thus 
weighing these considerations to the full extent of his in 
tellect, Vasudeva most respecttully worshipmned that mos 
sinful being. Then assuming a countenance resembling 
_new-blown lotus and with an aching heart, he again smilingly 
said unto that crooked and shameless one. “O most 
gracious one! thou hast, naught to fear from what the 
incarporeal voice bath spoken to thee. I shall leave to thee 


all the sons of this lady, who will be the cause of thy 
fear.” 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 7 


THE AuSPICIOUS SUKA Continued :—Perceiving the weight 
of his (Vasudeva’s) words, Kansa desisted from slaying his 
relative. Immensely delighted, Vasudeva also entered his 
own abode, after having eulogised him (Kansa). 

With the lapse of time, Devaki who was permeated with 
all the deities, in nine successive years, gave birth to eight 
sons and one daughter. Overcome with the fear of proving 
false to his promise, Vasudeva with great anguish, gave 
over his renowned first-born son to Kansa. What is there 
he pious can not bear up against? What is there the 
earned are in need of ? What act is there the wicked cannot 
erpetrate ? What is there the self-subdued cannot rerownce ? 
O king! seeing Vasudeva’s equanimity and his true observ- 
ance of his promise, Ka#s@ was very much delighted and 
smiling thus spoke unto him: “Let the babe return to thy 
protection; { have naught to fear of him; surely my death 
has been ordained to come from thy eighth-born son.” Then 
complying with his commands, and taking his son, he went 
away; but he did not believe in the words of that wicked 
one of uncontrolled self. O descendant of Bharata! the 
cowherds Nanda aud others who resided in Braja and the 
wives of these people, the Vriskuis headed by Vasudeva, 
and the wives of the Yadus headed by Devaki, the relatives 
friends and allies of these two races, and also the followers 
of Kausa, were all god-like persons. At that time the potent 
Narada apprised Kansa of these facts, as also of the pres 
paration of the celestials for the extirpation of the Daityas 
creating the burthen of the earth. When the sage had gone 
away, Kansa considering all the issues of Devaki to be Vishnu 
the cause of his future death, confined Devaki and Vasudeva in 
rison after having bound them in chains. He killed their sons 
whenever one was born to them, fearing every one of their 
(sons) to be the unborn Divinity (Vishnu) himself. Generally 
on this earth, covetuous monarchs, bent on satiating the 
thirst of their heart, -slay their mothers, fathers, brothers, 


8 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


and all well-wishers and friends. Considering himself to be 
the self-same potent Asura Kalanemi, who had been pre- 
viously killed by Vishnu, he commenced hostilities against 
the Yadus. Sorely oppressing his own father Ugrasena, and 
the lords of the Yadus, the Vojas, and the Andhagas that 
wondrous-powerful being began to rule over the Surasenas. 


at 


CHAPTER lf. 


i ie AUSPICIOUS SUKA went on :—The powerful Kansa 
the great ally of the sovereign of the AZagadhas,'in company 
with Pralamva, Chanura, Vaka, Trinavarta, Aghasur, Musthika, 
Aristha, Divida, Putana, Kesee, Dhenuk, and other Asura 
kings, as also in company with Vana and Vouma, began to 
spread havoc among the Yadus. Sorely oppressed, the Yadus 
fled to the kingdoms of the Kurus, the Panchalas, the Kaike- 
yas, the Salvahs, the Vidharbbas, the Nishadhas; the Videhas 
and the Kocalas; some among the kinsmen of Kansa, eS 
to serve bim by maoow ing his commagads SONS 


Almighty. Lord, the soul of the univé 
refugees the Yadus afraid of Kansa, 
goddess presiding over the 
Yoga. ‘O goddess} O gentle One! 
inhabited by the cow-herds and beautifi 
and other wives of Vasudeva are hidin 
cave in.the regions of the cow-herd 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 9 


fear of Kazsa. Devaki beareth in her womb a portion of 
myself by name Sesha. Taking it out, do thou introduce 
it in the womb of Rohini. O blessed One! then I will be 
born with fullness of parts, as a son of a Devaki; thou shalt 
be born in Josodha the wife of Nanda. Men shall adore 
thee,—the cherished goddess of those desirous of progeny 
and prosperity, and the bestower of all desires and boons—with 
various offerings, articles and victims. Men on earth shall 
erect temples for thee, and give thee, these denominations, _ 
namely, Durga, Vadrakali, Vijaya, Vaisnavi, Kumuda, Chan- 
dika, Krishna, Madhavi, Kanyaka, Maya, Narayani, Eshani 
Sarada, and Ambic&. The foetus shall be called Sankarsana, 
on account of its being removed in embryo from one womb 
, to another. It shall also be called Rama for affording delight 
to people and Valabhadra for its exuberance of prowess.” 
Thus commanded by the Almighty Lord, she, the goddess 
of the illusive energy, respectfully accepted His words 
and assented to all of them. Then circumambulating Him 
she repaired to the terrestrial regions, and performed what 
she had been told to do. When the embryo of Devaki had 
been removed to the womb of Rohini by Yoganidra (the 
goddess of the illusive energy), the citizens of Mathura cried 
aloud saying ‘Oh! Devaki has miscarried.’ The Almighty 
Lord, the soul of the universe, and the giver of assurances 
of safety to his devotees, also revealed himself in his fulness 
of parts, in the heart of Vasudeva. Bearing inside himself 
the self-revealed image of the Lord, Vasudeva shone forth 
like unto the sun, and became greatly indomitable and hard 
of being approached near. by beings. Then like unto the 
| eastern quarter bearing the delightful moon, the divine 
Devaki bore, in her mind,—having duly received it from the 
son of Sura,—the incarnation of the Deity that never lapseth, 
the source of all welfare of the worlds, and the essence of 
all things, and who was present in herself in the form of 
her soul. Devaki, becoming the abode of the Lord, the 
* i 


10 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 
ea oarr 


re ¥ 
container of the worlds, did appear to be supremely beauti- 
ful; she was confined in prison by Kansa like unto the 
flame of a lamp confined inside an earthen pot, as also, like 
unto the chaste goddess of learning mastered by one jealous 
of imparting knowledge to others. Seeing that lady of pure 
smiles bearing inside her womb the unconquerable divinity 
and illuminating the room with her effulgence, Kansa mut- 
tered :—‘ Surely desirous of robbing me of my life, Hari 
had taken shelter in the cavity of her womb; for ere now she | 
was not so resplendent. What at present ought to be done | 
by me regarding this matter. Knowing His own interests 
well, He will not hesitate in displaying His prowess (to 
slay me). On the other hand, if I slay this helpless woman, 
my sister big with achild, I shall, for all time to come, destroy 
my prosperity, my fame and duration of life. He is more 
dead than alive, who lives by perpetrating heartless deeds. 
Men pronounce maledictions on him; surely at the destruc- 
tion of the body, that being, proud of his body, goes to hell 
pervaded with darkness.’ 

Thus refraining from following his darkest intentions, 
that mighty being, keeping alive his inveterate enemity, waited 
for the birth of Hari. Thinking of Hrishikesha (Krishna) 
when sitting, or lying, or standing or eating, or drinking or 
walking, he (Kazsa) saw the universe pervaded by Him. 
At that time, Brahma and Bhava, accompanied by Narada 
and other sages and by the celestials attended by their fol- 
lowers, repairing to that place, began to praise with pleasing 
words the Lord, the bestower of all boons. 

“We seek shelter in thyself, who art of truthful vows, 
the means of attaining unto whom is the way of truth, who 
art the true existing entity in the three periods (before 
creation, during preservation and after the destruction of the 
worlds), who art the origin of the true elements (earth, 
water, fire, sky and air,) and dost pervade them and art their 
true essence, who art the first introducer of truthful speech 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. a 


and true behaviour, and (lastly) who art all truth. This 
visible universe is like unto a large tree, having only one 
stay (Prakriti), two fruits (happiness and misery), three roots 
(the Principles of goodness, energy and dullness), four kinds 
of secretions (religion, wealth, desire and emancipation), 
five channels of perception (the five senses), six characteristic 
features (grief, fondness, decrepitude, death, thirst and 
hunger), seven kinds of barks (skin, blood, flesh, albumen, 
bone, marrow and semen), eight branches (the five elementary 
ingredients and the mind, the understanding and egoism), nine 
holes (the nine outlets of the body), ten leaves (the ten vital 
breaths) and two birds sitting on its branches (the indivi- 
dual and the Supreme soul). Thou art the producer of this 
universe of actions; thou art the cause of its destruction ; 
thou art its only preserver. Those persons, whose intellects 
are veiled over by thy illusive energy, behold thee in different 
forms. But the learned do not see thee in that way. Thy 
semblance is all knowledge. For the welfare of the mobile 
and immobile universe, thou dost assume forms, which, com- 
posed of the principle of goodness, brings happiness for the 


| pious and destruction for the wicked. O lotus-eyed One! the 


learned, with their hearts completely engrossed in contem- 
plation on thyself,—the receptacle of all goodness,—turning 
thy feet, ere now served by illustrious persons, into a vessel for 
crossing this ocean of life, consider it (ocean) as insignificant 
as water contained in the impression of a calf’s feet. O res- 
plendent One! people entertaining friendly feeling for all 
beings, have crossed over this ocean of life—hard to cross 
over and dreary—without the help of anything. They have 
tided over this ocean, leaving on this side of it, the vessel 


consisting of thy lotus feet. Thou art merciful to the pious. 


O thou of eyes like lotus petals! those persons who boast 
of their emancipation (obtained without thine interference), 
surely want ia devotion to thyself, in consequence of which 
their understandings ever remain impure. Attaining with 


12 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


great difficulty to the highest state, they again fall to the 
depths of degradation, for not having tended thy two feet. 
O Madhava! thy chosen ones, bearing unshaken friendship 
towards thee, are never reduced to'this condition. They never 
deviate from the right path. O Lord ! protected by thyself, 
they undauntedly tread upon the heads of those who throw 
impediments on their way. During the period of preserva- 
tion, thou assumest a semblance, all goodness and pure, and 
the breeder of welfare of corporeal beings. ‘In consequence 
of this assumption of a form on thy part, people accomplish 
thy adoration by the Vedas, actions, Yoga, austerities, and 
contemplation. O creator! if this form composed of the 
essence of goodness be not thine own, then the know- 
ledge supreme, that purges the sense of distinction begot of | 
ignorance, cannot also be thine. Thou art betokened by 
a continuous manifestation of thy qualities, as He whose 
qualities are manifested, or He, through whose instrumentality 
these are manifasted. Thy denomination and thy semblance 
cannot be ascertained by qualities, actions or (high) birth; 
for thy ways can only be imagined by the mind and described 
in speech, as thou art the spectator of these both. Still, O 
Lord! thou art realised by those people who worship thee by 
betaking to Karma Yoga. Whosoever during the perform- 
ance of actions, hearing, recounting, contemplating on, 
and making others to remember, thy names and incarnations, 
hath his heart absorbed in thy two lotus-feet, is never born 
again. O Harif{ fortunately by the incarnation of thy 
supreme Self, the heavy burthen of this earth will 
be removed. Fortunately we shall see tthe earth decor. 
ated with thy highly beautiful foot-prints, as also, the 
heavenly regions over-flooded with thy mercy. O Lord! 
verily we can not ‘conceive any other cause of thy birth, 
exceptin thy playful humour; for thou art not attached 
to this earth, O thou who art ever free from fear! 
indeed tle birth, the preservation and the destruction of 


SRIMADBUAGABATAM. * 13 


the individual. soul, are brought about by the delusive energy 
contained in.thyself. Thou dost protect us and the three 
worlds by incarnating thyself asa fish, 'a horse, a tortoise, 
a boar, as Nristngha, as a swan, as one among the ruling 
order, as a Vipra, and a deity. O Lord! at present in the 
same way, do thou remove the burthen of this earth. O 
foremost of the Yadus we salute thee. O mother (addressing 
Devaki),- fortunately the foremost male being, the Almighty 
Lord himself, hath entered into thy womb, for the advance- 
ment of) our well-being. Thou hast no reason to be afraid of 
the lord of the, Vojas, whose death is imminent. Thy son 
shall be the protector of the Yadus.’ 

Thus praising, without the least exaggeration, the Lord 
whose semblance is the visible universe, the celestials 
placing Brahma ‘and-Ishana at their head, went back te 
Heaven. 


CHAPTER III. 


Pad AuSPICIOUS SUKA said:—On the advent of a 
highly delightful season fraught with all blessings—when 
the asterisk Rohrnt rode ascendant and when Asvznt and 
other constellations and stars shed a holy light, when the 
cardinal quarters were all propitious and on the sky shone 
forth bright stars, when the earth with its towns, countries, 
pastures and mines, was filled with ail benedictions, when 
rivers over-flowed with pure water, and lakes were beautified 
with lotuses, when forests rang with the songs of birds 
and droning of the bee and abounded in floral wealth, when 
a pure and pleasant breeze blew bearing a sweet odour 


14 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


when the extinguished fires of the regenerate ones again 
flashed forth, when the hearts of the pious and of others. 
except Kansa, were enraptured, when, at the time of the 
birth of that unborn Divinity, kettle-drums were sounded, 
Kinnaras sang, Gandharvas, Siddhas and Charanas hymned, 
and Vidhyadharas together with the Apsaras danced out 
of joy, and celestials and sages, greatly delighted, showered 
heaps of flowers, when at the birth of /anérdana during 
the gloomy night, the rain clouds gave forth a low rumbling 
sound re-echoed by the sea—Vishnu, the knower of all hearts, 
brought himself out of the womb of the divine Devaki, 
like unto the full moon rising on the Eastern quarter of 
heaven. Vasudeva saw that wonderful boy (new-born babe) 
having eyes like lotus petals and four arms, bearning a conch 
and armed with a mace and other weapons, having the sign 
of Srivatsa on his breast, and with neck adorned with the 
Kousthava gem. He saw the boy clad in a blue garment, 
with a complexion beautiful like that of dense rain-cloud, 
and with this flowing locks shinning with the rays of the 
invaluable lapises embossed in his crown and of the gems 
constituting his pendant ; he (Vasudeva) saw him (the boy) 
with his person set off with a beautiful zone, with bracelets, 
armlets, and other ornaments. Then beholding Hari, born 
as his son, the eyes of Vasudeva bloomed forth in wonder. 
On the joyous occasion of the incarnation of Krishna, he 
was struck with reverence, and overcome with delight he 
gave away, in his mind, ten thousand kine to the twice- 
born ones. O descendant of Bharata! thereafter ascertain- 
ing the babe to be the Supreme Purusha, with his body bent 
forward, his palms folded, his intellect composed and 
liberated from all terror, and conversant with the prowess of 
the Lord, Vasudeva began to pray unto Him who lay 
illuminating the lying-in-room with his effulgence. 

THE AUSPICIOUS VASUDEVA said :—O Lord I have come 
to recognise thee. Thou art the supreme Lord of Prakrite. 


—=- 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 15 


Thy only semblance is feeling and ecstacy. Thou art the 
spectator of all intellects, Verily thy semblance is as above 
description. Creating through thy illusive energy this universe 
unified with the three Principles, thou dost appear 
as pervading it, though in reality thou art, away from 
it. Just as the elementary ingredients combined with the 
compound ones—combined, because severally their potencies 
are incapable of producing any thing—produce this Universe, 
and having produced it, they appear to be unified with 
it, but which is not possible, for they existed before the crea- 


tion of the worlds ; so in the same manner, though thou art 
connected with the objects of perception and with the senses, 
the nature of which is known by their acts, yet thou art not 
perceived with these. Ever undiscerned, thou hast no inside 
or outside. Thou art every thing, thou art the essence and 
the origin of all things and thou art the real entity. Who- 
ever considers his objects of enjoy ment—which he never 
comes by—to be the best of all other things, is surely most 
ignorant. Undisputedly it is not proper to make a sage of 
such a one. For verily that person eagerly accepts things re- 
nounced by othérs as hateful. O Lord! the creation, preser- 
vation and destruction of this universe is said to come from thy- 
self, transcending the Principles, performing no acts and free 
from all changes. As applied to thee, the Brahma and the Lord, 
there is no contradiction in the above assertion. Though the 
above-mentioned acts are performed by the Principles, yet 
they are ascribed to thine agency, as thou art the repository 
of the Principles. Of such a nature, thou assumest through 
thy illusive energy, a white complexion, the result of the prin- 
ciple of goodness, for the preservation of the worlds. 
For the creation of the worlds thou assumest a red 
complexion, the result of the Principle of energy, and 
lastly for their destruction, thou assumest a dark complexion 
resulting from the Principle of duliness. O Lord of all the 
«egions! O almighty one! desirous of protecting this 


16 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


universe, ‘thou hast’ incarnated thyself in our house. Thou 
shalt annihilate the mighty army that is being parraded by 
the innumerable Asura lords, none other than the sovereigns 
of the earth. O lord of the celestials! this crooked Kaxsa, 
hearing that thou shalt be born in our house, has slain thy 
elders. He has been informed of ‘thy incarnation by his 
menials, and ere long shall come here weilding weapons. 

THE AUSPICIOUS SUKA continued :—Thereupon Devaki, 
struck with wonder and afraid of Kansa, seeing her son 
possessed of the signs of the illustrious Lord, began to hyma 
the Lord thus. 

TuE AUSPICIOUS DEVAKI said :—Thou art Vishnu himself, 
the lamp of spirituality, who art described in the Vedas as 
something indescribable, as ‘the elementary cause, as the 
Brahma, as all radiance, as transcending the Principles, as 
free from all changes, as all consciousness, as something 
particular, and as one performing no actions. At the expi- 
ration of a period measuring two Parddhwas, when the des- 
truction of the universe takes place, when the great elements 
are dissolved into their subtle essences, and when 
in course of time, these manifested essences are lapsed 
into the unrevealed Pradhana, thou art the only One who 
‘abideth bearing the denomination of The Endless. O friend 
of Prakriti! this great Kala, beginning with Nimesha and 
ending in a year, through whose intrumentality the world is 
undergoing changes, is said to be thy sport. ] seek protec- 
tion in thee, the ford of all things and the receptacte of all 
auspiciousness. The mortal world, afraid of the venomous 
serpent of death, had fled to all the different regions, but no- 
where hath it received assurances of safety. O Primary Being! 
through immense good fortune, attaining to thy lotus-like feet, 
it now rests ia comfort. Death hath run away from it. Of 
such a nature, do thou save us, greatly frightened from the 
cruel son of Ugrasena ; for, thou dost always discard the terror 
of thy servants. Do thou not make this, thy Divine form, 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 17 


that is worthy of being meditated upon, an object of sight of 
beings like myself. O slayer of Madhut let not the sinful 
Kansa know of thy birth out of my womb. I am afraid of 
Kansa on thy account. My mind misgiveth me. O essence 
of the universe { conceal this thy superhuman form, furnished 
with four arms, and set off with the beauty of thy conch, the 
discus, the mace and the lotus. Thou, the Supreme Purusha, 
dost hold, inside thy own body, this universe 2% extenso, at the 
end of the universal destruction | Thou art now born out of 
my womb! Surely this is a mockery for the worlds. 

THE AUSPICIOUS ALMIGHTY ONE said :—O chaste lady, 
in the past cycle of Sayambhuba, thou wert Prisnz in the 
heavens. At that time this sinless Vasudeva, was a Praja- 
pati, by name Sutaéa. Commanded by Brahma to create pro- 
geny, subduing all your senses, you both observed rigid 
austerities ; you suffered from the rains, the storms, the rays 
of the sun, and from colds and other inclemencies of the 
seasons. The dirts of your minds were washed off by your 
restraining of your breaths. You then lived upon rotten 
leaves and air. Desirous of securing from me your cherished 
objects, you performed my worship witha tranquil heart. O 
gentle lady! thus when you were performing the rigid and 
assiduous penance with your hearts engrossed on me, thou- 
sand celestial years rolled away. O sinless one! then always 
cherished by both of you in your hearts with respect, 
reverence and asceticism, [ was propitious unto you ; desirous 
of conferring your desired boon, I, the foremost of boon- 
givers, revealed myself to youin this form. Then on my 
saying ‘Ask of me whalever boon you like’ you begged the 
the boon of having a son like unto myself. Both of you, hus- 
band and wife, had not enjoyed the hateful objects of this 
warld, and were childless. Befooled by my energy vi Iliusion, 
you did not ask emancipation of me. When I had gone away, 
and while attaining the fruition of your desires and obtaining 
the boon of getting a sou like’ myself, you wete occupied 

3 


18 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


with the enjoyment of vile objects, I was born as your son. 
Finding none, on the face of the earth, equal to me, in conse- 
quence of my possessing a good character, generosity and 
other attributes, people called me the son of Prisnz. Again 
I was born as your son, begotten by Kasyapa upon Aditi; 
I was called Upendra, and Vdmana in consequence of my 
dwarfish stature. O chaste lady! in my third incarnation, I 
was again born, inthe same manner, with the same appear- 
ance, in your family. Know my words to be true; I have 
shown this semblance of mine to you, to help you to remem- 
ber my previous births. Otherwise you could not have 
known me by seeing these marks of humanity oa myself. 
You both shall attain to my mode of existence by always 
thinking me, out of affection, as your son, or by meditating 
on me as the Supreme Brahman. 

Thus speaking the almighty Hari paused. Then by means 
of his own illusive energy he took the form of an ordinary 
new-born babe, before the very eyes of his parents. When 
Vasudeva, who had been ordered by the almighty Lord to do 
so, was on the point of going out of the lying-in-room with 
his son, at that moment the unborn Yoga Méyd, was born 
out of the womb of the wife of Nanda. Then through the 
agency of this Maya, the senses of the gate-keepers were 
deprived of the power of discharging their respective func- 
tions and the citizens lay unconscious in sleep. When Vasu- 
deva bearing Krishna, came near the door-frames barred 
with heavy doors secured with iron chains and bolts, the 
doors flew open out of their own accord like unto darkness 
flying before the rising sun. The rain-cloud Parjannya pour- 
ed down showers accompanied by low thunder; protecting 
Vasudeva from the rains by spreading on him his hood, the 
serpent Sesha followed him. On account of Indra pouring 
down continuous showers, a strong current was generated 
in the river Yamuna, the daughter of Yama. The current 
brought about dashing waves which made the river 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 19 


frothy. She (the river) was also terrible in consequence of 
numerous frightening whirl-pools. Yet she afforded passage 
to Vasudeva, like unto the ocean affording passage to the 
Lord of the goddess Srz. Repairing to the kingdom of 
Nanda, Vasudeva saw the cow-herds profoundly asleep 
through the influence of Yoea Méyé. Thereupon placing 
the babe on the bed of Yashoda and taking with him 
her daughter, he returned to his room. Thereafter 
Vasudeva laying the female child on the bed of Devaki 
and chaining his feet with the iron fetters, remained 
imprisoned as before. Yashoda, the wife Nanda, felt that she 
was delivered of a child; but fatigued and with her memory 
stolen by delusion, she could not discern the sex of the baby. 


CHAPTER IV. 


Se a enema 


Tae AUSPICIOUS SUKA went on:—The inner as well 
as the outer doors became closed of themselves, as before. 
Thereafter hearing the cries of the babe, the warders of 
the prison awoke. Repairing in all haste to the king of the 
Vojas, they informed him of Devaki’s delivery of a child; 
which event Kamsa was anxiously looking forward to. 
Hurriedly arising from his bed, bewildered and thinking that 
his death-day has come, Kansa speedily came to the lying- 
in-chamber with faltering steps and with his hair dishevelled. 
The divine and chaste lady, now very miserable, most piteously 
addressed her brother saying :—‘O blessed one! this baby 
is (will be) thy daughter-in-law. Thou ought not to kill 
this female child. O, brother! like unto a fire-brand, thou 


20 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


hast destroyed many of my children, delegated to do so by 
Destiny. Leave this daughter to me. O master} I am 
most miserable, thy younger sister; | have been bereft of all 
my children by thee. O brother! it behoveth thee to leave 
to my ill-fated self, this last of my issues. 

THE AUSPICIOUS SUKA continued :—Thus piteously be- 
wailing and ardently clasping her daughter (to her heart) 
she like one poorest of poors, begged the safety of her 
child. But the wicked Kansa, reprimanding her, tore the 
child off her breast. Having his affection superseded by 
self-interest, he seized the new-born daughter of his sister 
by the feet, and with vehemence dashed her against the 
surface. of a rock. Flying off his grasp, Devaki’s daughter 
rose upwards and assuming the form of a_ goddess 
stationed herself in the heavens. People then recognised 
in her, the goddess, the younger sister of Vishnu, decked 
with beautiful garlands, ornaments and jewels, clad in fine 
garments, smeared with unguents, and bearing eight mighty 
arms furnished with weapons. She held in ot hands, a 
bow, a trident, arrows, a shield, a sword, a conch, a discus, and 
amace. Hymned by the Siddhas, Charanas, Gandharvas, 
Apsaras, Kinnaras, and serpents, and Adored with various 
offerings by them, she thus spoke (unt Kansa) — 

‘O wicked one{ what availeth-thee to slay myself. Thy 
former adversary hath been born 


$s thy death somewhere 
else. Do thou not slay other inyécent children in vain.’ 
Thus speaking unto bim/ the potent goddess Maya, 
established herself on earth in hirinies of various names and 
was differently styled. Having heard her utterances Kansa 
was struck with wonder ; then fliberating Devaki and Vasudeva 
he said unto them with huiatli 'y :-—‘O sister ! O brother-in-law ! 
alas! like unto a cannibal /devouring his children, I, sinful 
wretch, have slain the issfies of my kinsmen. OF such a 
nature, I have given up| mercy; jealous of others | have 
renounced all friends and gelatives. Know I not what region 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 21 


I shall be taken to, after I breathe my last, like-unto a slayer 
of Brahmanas. Not only mortals speak lies; but even 
celestials equivocate. I, a sinful wretch, believing in the 
assertions of these latter, have slain the babes of my sister. 
Ye both are high-souled; do not lament for your children, 
who have departed in consequence of their pristine deeds. 
Beings are under the control of Destiny and so cannot 
always live together and in the same place. Like unto pots 
made of earth, bodies are created and destroyed. But 
unlike these, the soul enshrined inside them, undergoeth no 
change, even as the earth of the pots remains unattered. 
Those who are not congnisant of this truth are encompass- 
ed by a perversity prompting them to consider their body as 
their own ; consequent upon this, a sense of egoism takes hold 
of them. In consequénce of this latter again, they become 
connected with and separated from,their children. Out of 
this connection and separation, happiness or misery is reaped 
by_them; and so long as ignorance. continues to hold 
sway over them, their worldly connection does not cease. 
Therefore O gentle lady! do thou not lament for thy 
children, whom I have slain. Every body, being power- 


less, reaps the fruits of his own deeds. So long a 
person non-conversant with the real nature of his self, con- 
siders himself as a slayer or as one slain, he in conse- 
quence of his ascribing his body’s destruction to his soul, 
is deluded by empty notions of obligation. Ye both are 
pious and kind towards your relatives, Pardon me, for my 
misdeed.” Thus speaking, with a’ tearful countenance he 
(Kansa) fell down at the feet of his sister and brother-in-law. 
Believing in the words of the daughter (of Devaki), he set 
Devaki and Vasudeva free from their chains and showed 
his love for them (by smooth and pleasing speeches.) Then 
Devaki, forgiving her penitent brother, gave up all anger 
against him ; Vasudeva also said unto him smiling :—“O great 
king! it is evén-.so as thou sayest; the egoistic conscious- 


—~_ 


22 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


ness of corporeal beings, springs out of their ignorance. 
This, in its turn, begets a sense of distinction indexed by 
such terms as ‘mine’ ‘others’, etc. Persons recognising 
such a distinction are enslaved by grief, joy, fear, malice, 
covetuousness, ignorance and pride, and can not see (realise) 
the Lord who destroys things through. the instrumentality 
of other things.” Thus greatly delighted, they addressed 
Kansa in a way as to create confidence in his heart regarding 
their words. Then with the permission of Devaki and Vasu- 
deva, he went back to his apartments. But scarcely when 
the night had passed away, Kausa summoning his councillors, 
said unto them everything that had been said by Yogamdyd. 
The Daitayas, the adversaries of the celestials, bearing 
a life-long enmity against them and of shallow comprehen- 
hension, having heard the words of their protector, answered 
him thus :—"O foremost of kings! even if it be as thou sayest, 
we will this day, slay all children above ‘ten days or below, 
in every city, village, or pasture, or in any other place. 
What can the celestials do with all their endeavours, cowards 
as they are in battle, and living as they do, in perpetual terror 
of mind generated by the twanging of thy bow-string ? 
When thou wert bent on slaying the celestials, pierced with 
thy arrows, cautious of saving their lives, they fled taking 
to their heels and leaving the field of battle behind. Some 
of the dwellers of the celestial regions, laying aside their 
weapons out of terror,‘stood with their hands folded. Others 
with their garments falling off and tassels untied, wailed 
aloud saying ‘Oh we are frightened.’ Thou didst. not 
slay them, when out of fear they forgot all their weapons and 
arrows, when they were despoiled of their chariots, when their 
bows were shattered and when bewildered they fled, turning 
their faces away from the field of battle. What care we for 
the celestials, who only display their bravery in peaceful 
regions, and who vaunt of their prowess and might at places 
where there is no possibility of wat? What harm can Hari 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 23 


who always hides himself in secret places, can do unto us? 
What also can Sambhu—who dwells in the forest, do 
unto us? What is there to be afraid of Indra of insignificant 
prowess or of Brahma performing severe austerities? Still 
the celestials are our adversaries and we think we ought 
not to neglect them. Therefore employ us, thy own fol- 
lowers, for the complete irradication of them. Just as_ 
a malady, seizing the bodies of men, if neglected at the 
“first stage, cannot be cured by them when its roots are deep 
spread in their systems, and just as the passions, if not 
checked from the beginning, cannot be brought under con- 
trol afterwards, so a great adversary (if not thwarted at 
the first opportunity) cannot be overcome when he has 
gathered strength. Vishnu is the root, the source of. strength 
of all the celestials. With Him eternal righteousness goeth. 
The origin of this latter_again consists in the Vedas, the 
kine, the Brahmanas, religious austerities and sacrifices 
accompanied by (profuse) Dakshinas. Therefore O king! by 
all means, we will slay the Brahmanas, the reciters of the 
Vedas, the anchorites performing austerities and those con- 
tinually celebrating sacrifices and cows yielding milk. The 
Vipras, the kine, the Vedas, religious mortification, truth, 
quietitude, self-control, reverence, benevolence, forgiveness 
and sacrifices—these constitute the form of Vishnu. He is the 
superintendent of all the deities, the knower of all hearts 
and the enemy of the Asuras. The celestials with Siva 
and the four-headed Divinity (Brahma), have got him for 
their (main) stay. This is the only means of killing him, 
namely, by the persecution of the pious.” 

Thus the evil-minded Kansa, holding consultation with 
his evil councillors considered the persecution of the Brab- 
manas as the best course open to him. For indeed he was 
environed by the noose of the Xé/a, Then delegating the 
Danavas, who were naturally fond of oppression and-who 
could agsume various forms at their will, to all the different 


24 SRIMADBHAGARATAM. 


quarters of the heavens for the persecution of pious people, 
he entered into his own apartment. The Asuras, in whom 
the principle of energy predominated and whose minds were 
darkened by the principle of dullness, and whose death was 
near at hand, commenced hostilities against the pious. The 
persecution of the great by a person, destrovs his duration 
of life, his prosperity, his fame, his’ righteousness, his 
chance of attaining to blessed regions after death, his happi- 
hess and (lastly) all his welfare. 


CHAPTER V. 


Tis AUSPICIOUS SUKA went on :—Enraptured at the birth 
of a son, the high-minded Nanda purified with a bath and 
wearing ornaments, calling the Brahmanas versed in the Vedas, 
made them at first pronounce benedictions on his (new- * 
born) son and then duly perform the rites to be gone through 
at the birth of a child, as also the adoration of the ancestral 
manes and the deities. He gave unto the Brahmanas two mil- 
lion of cows adorned with ornaments and seven mountain-like 
heaps of sesamum seeds covered with gems, gold dusts, and 
red cloths. Some objects (as earth &c.) are purified in the 
course of time, some (as bodies) by being washed with 
water, some (impure unguents) by- being ‘cleansed, some by 
the performance of purifactory rites; and some (as senses) 
by the observance of austerities. Some men (as the Brah- 
Manas) are purified by the celebration of sacrifices; some. 
things, are purified by being given unto others, and some 
again (as the mind &c) by contentment, and lastly the soul 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM, 3g 


is purified by self-knowledge. The Vipras began to pro-. 
nounce benedictoryaverses. The Suéas the "Méagadhas and | 
the Vandins and the singers began to sing; and kettle | 
drums and tabors began to be unceasingly sounded. The 
whole city of Vraja. then shone forth with its doors, court- 
yards and interiors of houses cleansed and sprinkled with | 
water. It was adorned with variegated pennons and flags,’ 
with garlands, pieces of sill raiments, twigs and artificial 
arches. All the oxen, the heifers and the calves were smeared 
with oil and turmeric paste. They were also decked with orna- 
ments of valuable metals, peacocks’ feathers, garlands, gar- 
ménts and golden strings. O king ! the cow-herds also, wearing 
valuable garments and ornaments ‘and beautified with Kan- 
chukas and furnished with turbans, began to come to the 
* rbyal palace carrying various presents in their hands. The 
wives of the ¢aw-herds having heard, that a son had been 
born to Yashoda, were greatly delighted and began to decorate 
their persons with garments, ornaments and collyrium. Their 
lotus-like faces were beautified with filaments of lotuses 
and with fresh saffrons. Carrying presents, and with theit 
moving breasts and rourid bips, they speedily repaired to 
the king’s résidence. When -on their way to the palace of 
Nanda, these damsels appéared highly beautiful, wearing 
bright diamond pendants, having their necks set off with 
necklaces, clad in wonderfully wrought garments, with 
chaplets of flowers falling off from their hair, with hands 
décorated with bracelets, and having flowing locks, heaving 
breasts and charming garlands on them. They pronounced 
benedictions on the baby saying “ May it live long.’ Thea 
smearing it with turmeric powder and oil and washing it with 
water, they hymned the unborn Divinity. During the great fes- 
tive season, when-Krishna, the Lord of the universe, the infinite 
ene, was born in Vraja, the kingdom of Nanda, all the different 
kinds of musical instruments were played upon. The cow-herds 
greatly delighted, sprinkling curd, milky’ clarified buttér and 
4.) 


26 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


water on one another ; and smearing one another with butter, 
tried to throw one another down (on the slippery pavement). 
For the adoration of Vishnu and for the well-being of his 
son, the high-minded and liberal Nanda, gave unto them 
(cow-herds), cloths, ornaments and kine, and unto the Suéas, 
Miaghadhas and Vandins and others living by learning, their 
cherished objects; and he thus honored them according to 
their worth. The high-souled Rohini, greeted by the cow- 
herd Nanda, dressed in fine garments and adorned with orna- 
ments and garlands, moved about for welcoming the guests 
of the palace. Thence forward Vraja, the kitigdom of Nanda, 
was filled with all prosperity. O king! the goddess of pro- 
sperity, out of her free will, made it her pleasure garden in 
consequence of its becoming the abode of Hari. 

O foremost ‘of the Kurus! then engaging the cow-herds 
in the protection of the kine, Nanda went to Mathura, to pay 
unto Kansa his annual tribute. Vasudeva, hearing that his 
brother Nanda had come and knowing that he had paid his 
tribute to the king (Kansa), repaired to his (Nanda’s) lodging. 
Like unto the body rising up at the return of life, Nanda, 
seeing his dearest friend come, rose up, and greatly delighted 
and overcome with affection, embraced him with his two arms. 
O Lord of thy people! then duly adored and greeted, and 
questioned about his welfare by Nanda, and comfortably 
seated, Vasudeva, having his heart engrossed on his two sons, 
thus spoke. a 

‘O brother! it is indeed fortunate that thou, who 
wert childless till this advanced age, and whose hope 
of getting progeny was also lost, shouldst be blessed with 
ason. Fortunately this day I have the pleasure of seeing 
thee, who appearest to be newly born, though all the while 
thou wert rolling on the wheel of existence. Indeed a sight 
of one beloved is scarcely obtained. O dear one! the living 
together of {friends of diverse occupations, is not possible. 
Is everything faring well regatding the large pasture where 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 27 


thou art,.at present, dwelling surrounded by. thy friends? 
Is it free from the rage of. any plague? Are the cattle there 
doing well? ‘Does it abound in grass, twining} creepers and 
(translucent) water? O brother! does my son, reared by 
thee and thy wife, together with his mother, fare well in thy 
kingdom of Vraja? Does he regard thee as his father? 
Trivarga when employed for the benefit of their relatives 
is proper foe people and is countenanced by the Shastras ; 
but if their relatives continue to suffer distress, it ask rivarga) 
ds of no avail. 

The cow-herd Nanda answered :—Alas ! all thy sons be- 
gotten upon Devaki had been killed by Kansa. Even thy- 
only surviving beautifut daughter had gone away to heaven. 
Surely Destiny is the end of this universe; Destiny is the 
best of treasures. Whoever considers Destiny to be the 
ever-constant cause of his happiness or misery, is never in- 
fatuated. 

VASUDEVA said :—Thou hast paid thy annual tribute 
unto to the monarch and hast also seen us, Thou ought not to 
tarry here fot many days, for thy kingdom of Goku/a will be 
visited with many calimities. 

THE auspicious SUKA continued:—Thus spoken to by 
Vasudeva, and with his permission, the cowherds headed by 


Nanda mounting on cars yoked with bullocks, returned 
to Gokula, ae 


CHAPTER VI, 


Seemmmanenemem re 


dee AUSPICIOUS SUKA went on —On his way back to 
(Vraja), Nanda thought that the words of Vasudeva’ could 


28 SRIMADBHAGABATAN: * 


-néver be false. So, afraid of the advent of a; calamity, he - 
sought shelter in. Hari. 

The infant-destroyer the terrible Putana, having been dele- 
gated by Kansa, wandered through. cities,. villages and pas- 
tures killing infants. Wherever men do not listen to the 
recital of the name of the Lord of devotees—-a recital capable. 
of exterminating the race of Rakshasas—there.and there only 
can the monsters carry.on their work (of devastation). One 
night Putandg—having the power of moving without restraint 
and sailing through the skies,—came flying (through the. 
skies) to Gokula and entered into it, disguising herself by 
her own illusive energy, under the form of a damsel. Seeing 
her, with her fillet of hair adorned with jasmine, with round. 
hips and heaving breasts and slender waist, clad. in fine 
garments, with her face, beautified with the lustre of: ear-rings.. 
and shinning’ pendants, with charniing smiles and side-long. 
glances stealing the hearts of the inhabitants of Vraza, the. 
‘wives of. the cow-herds ‘considered. hee-to be the goddess of 
prosperity incarnate, bearing a lotus in her hand, come to. 
see her-own lord: «There roving at will in quest of.infants,: 
the infant-killer Putana, saw in the palace of Nanda the boy: 
Ktishia lying on. his. bed, with. his beaming. lustre veiled over 
like anto fire.covered: over with ashes. The essence. of the’ 
mobile and,immpbile universe Krishna, knowing. her. to:be. a. 
Rakhashi, the slayer of infants, shut his eyes. .Then she: 
(Putana) took the destroying Divinity on her lap. There- 
upon seeing her—whose heart was sharp like unto a 
sword incased in a scabbard—hehave like an affectionate 
mother and accomplished lady, and finding her suddenly 
come in their midst, the mothers of Krishna were stupified 
with her effulgence, and stood gazing at her. The Rékhashi” 
then, placing the child on her lap, put into its mouth hé, 
hipple annointed over with virulent poison. Thereupon vsfie- 
mently squeezing it- with both his hands, aad waxing 
irascible,. the almighty..Lord sucked it with her lifs, Squeezed) 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. ~ 2g 


in all: vital parts, she bawled forth saying ‘Leave; leave me.’ 
And with her pupils dilated and her body wet with conti-. 
nuous perspiration, she began to to wail aloud, throwing. out: 
at the same time her tegs and arms. In consequence of her 
deep and rapid roar the earth with .its mountains, and the 
heavens. with the planets, were shaken off from their respec-. 
tive places. The nether regions and the cardinal quarters: 
were filled with its echo; and. people fell down on the 
ground, fearing that a thunder-bolt had overtaken them. O 
monarch! the demoness extremely pained in her breasts and. 
devoid of consciousness, and gaping, and stretching forth her: 
legs and arms and looseuing-her hair, assumed her true forny, 
and, then fell, down on that pasture, like unto Vyritra struck! 
with, the thunder-bolt. O. foremost of kings! even in. its. 
fall, hee: body, crushed by. its weight, all: trees standing 
within, twelve .miles.. Surely this) was: greatly marveilous,: 
Ehe cow-herds and their wives, whose hearts ears and heads: 
were, ere now, rent asunder by the deep roar.of the Rékhashi;: 
were- greatly, frightened at seeing: lier form, furnished. 
with a. mouth ranged with terrible teeth long-as: the poles of; 
ploughs, ‘ with nasal: pits deep like the caverns of a: 
jonntain, with bobbies resembling lhillocks, with red. and: 
dishevelled hair, with eyes deep as dark, caves,, with beach-. 
like: buttocks, rendering it (form):all the more repulsive; withi 
arms, legs ‘and thighs resembling artificial daays, and with an 
abdominal cavity resembling: a. waterless lake. Seeing the: 
boy playing feartessly- on her breast, the wives of the cows; 
herds were, seized with terror and coming: in all haste took 
him away: Thereafter in ‘conjunction with, Yashod% and; 
Rohini, they managed the safe custody. of the boy by. moving. 
tha, cow’s tail on- his head and adopting such.other measures: 
Then bathing the-bey in-cow’s, urine, and sprinkling. the dust. 
of the.cawis hoof on his: body, they wrote with cow-dung- they 
twelve. names.of. Vishnu, on:the.twelve different parts-of his, 
body and’ thus, protected him from evil agencies. Then the: 


3e SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


wives of the cow-herds, first having touched water, seperately | 
assigned their bodies and their bands to their respective deties, 
and then performed Biyanydsa on the body of the boy, saying; 

“May the unborn Divinity protect thy feet, may Anximat 
guard thy knees, may Yajza guard thy thighs, may the 
Deity that never lapseth protect thy waist,» may: the 
horse-mouthed god guard thy stomach, may Kesava watch 
over thy heart, may /ske guard thy abdomen,.may /na@ save 
thy throat, may vishnu guard thy arms, Urukrama thy face, 
and /svara thy head. May the discus-handed Deity walk in 
front of thee, may the club-armed Hari walk behind thee, . 
and may the bow-bearing slayer of A/adhu and the sword- 
handed unborn god stay by thy sides. May Urugaya blow- 
ing the conch-shell, walk near the angles of thy body; may 
Upendra stay over thy head and Térkhya beneath thy 
body; and may the plough-bearing Purusha remain on all 
sides of thee (to protect thee). May thy senses be guarded 
by Hrishikesha, and thy vital breaths by Nérdyana; may 
,the culer of Svefadwipa guard thy heart and may the Lord of 
all Yoga save thy mind. May the son of Prisnz guard over 
thy understanding and may the supreme almighty Lord 
save thy soul. May Govinda protect thee when playing, 
and may Médhava watch over thee when asleep. May the’ 
Lord of Vatkuntha look after thee when walking; and may 
the consort of the goddess of prosperity, protect thee when 
seated. May the terror of all evil sprites, the eater of sacri- 
ficial oblations, protect thee when eating. The Dédékznis, the 
Jatudhanis, the Kushmandés, the infanticides, the goblins 
the Métris, the Pisdéchas, the Yakshas, the Rékhshas, the 
Vindyakas, Kotart, Revati, Jaistha, Putané and others 
Matrikas, Unmada, Apasmara and other devils inimical 
to the mind the body and the senses, and other evil omens and 
calamities dreamt of, and the. slayers of the old and the 
young,—may these and all other evil spirits be destroyed,’ 
being terrified. at the recital of the name of Vishnu.” 


. SRIMADBHAGABATAM. -3t 


Thus when the ceremony for the protection of the boy 
was completed by the Gopees of unshaken attachment, the 
mother of the boy Krishna, making him suck her breast, laid 
him down on his bed. At that time Nanda and other cow-herds 
returned from Mathura to Vraja. Beholding the’ body of 
Putana, they were struck with amazement. ‘Surely Vasudeva 
has, of late, become a prophet, or he has become the lord of 
Yoga, ora powerful sage. For he perceived the advent of 
this calamity, and spoke of it unto us.’ The dwellers of 
Vraja, then ‘severing with axes her (Putana’s) limbs and 
body, threw them at a distance ; then surrounding them with 
logs of wood, they burned them. From the body and 
limbs of Putand that were being burned, arose a smoke 
bearing a fragrant odour like unto that of Agura sandal 
wood. For all her sins had been destroyed in consequence 
of her being sucked by Krishna. The blood-sucker Rakhashi 
Putana,,.the slayer of men and infants, having out of 
enmity ‘given suck’ to Hari, attained after death to the 
state of sages. Not to speak of those who, like unto affec- 
tionate mothers, dedicating with reverence and devotion, 
their dearest objects to the ‘supreme soul Krishna, become 
attached to Him. Although she was a R&khashi, Putana 
attained to Heaven and to the posthumous state of the 
mother’s of Krishna; for, invading her body with his two 
feet—which are worshipped by those worthy of the world’s 
adoration, and which remain in the hearts of His devotees— 
the almighty Lord sucked her breast. It is no wonder then 
that the kine and the mothers of Krishna, having their milk 
sucked by Him, should attain to the same mode of existence 
as Putana did. For the almighty son of Devaki, the giver 
of emancipation and all other objects of existence, drank - 
their milk distilling out of the exeess of maternal affection. It 
is also not ‘possible, O king, that they who always looked upon 
Krishna as their son, should again suffer a birth in this 
world, which ordinarily results out of ignorance. The inha- 


132 ‘SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


bitants.of Vraya (who :had- gone to distant places), having 
smelt:the odour of the smoke arising out of the funeral pile 
{of Putana), returned -to it- saying~-What is this’ ‘Whence 
does it come’ &c. “Hearing from the cow-herds a description 
of the arrival, acts and death of Putaia and the safety of the 
boy, they were ‘strack with wonder. O descéndant of the 
Kurus! the generous-hearted Nanda returning from his so« 
journ (to Mathurd), took up his son on his lap, and smelting 
the crown of his head, ebtained great delight. 

Whatsoever person regardfully listens to this wonderful 
account of the liberation of Putana and the early achiev. 
ments of Krishna, becomes attached to Govinda. 


—O0—— 


CHAPTER, VIL 


-; : co sho ermine: 
: La AUSPICIOUS : PROTEGE oF, VisuNU (PARIKSHIT) 
said:—O' potent sage! whatsoever acts the Almighty Lord 
Hari had performed in His different iucarnations, a description 
of them is surely pleasing to our ears and capable of charm- 
ing our hearts. An audition of (the description of) these acts 
cures the maladies of a person’s heart, as also extinguishes the 
fliverse desires, the causes of these maladies. Ere long,it (audi- 
tion) purifies his real assence, and gencrates in him a devotioty 
towards Hari and a friendly feeling for the servants of: the 
Lord. May it then please thee to describe, unto us, the 
excellent character of Hart? Do thou describe unto us the 
marvellous achievments of His early days, when born in this 
terresttrial region he imitated the actions of human beings. 
VADARAYANI said :—Qne day, when the, asterisk that had 
presided at the birth of the. boy Krishna, was founded to ride 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM, .33 


ascendant, festivities were ‘held in Vraja to celebrate the 
Uthdutka ceremony (of the hoy). Then among the 
large number of females assembled in the palace, the 
chaste-hearted Yasodha carried out the rite of bathing her 
son with the water of the sacred places aad rivers; then 
musical instruments were struck up, songs were sung and 
‘Mantras and benedictions were pronounced by the ‘Brahe 
manas. Then when the annointing of her son had been per- 
formed and benedictions were pronounced ‘on him by the 
Vipras duly worshipped with the presentation of edibles, 
_garments and garlands, Yashoda, seeing his (son’s) eyes closing. 
in sleep, carefully laid him down underneath a car. The heart 
of this highly intelleagent lady was anxious on account of the 
Uthdnika ceremony, and she was occupied in welcoming . 
her guests, the inhabitants of Vraja; so she did not hear the 
cries of her son. The baby desirous of a suck from his 
mot'er’s breast, cried aloud and did not obtain it; he at 
times threw his legs in the air. Struck with the little feet— 
delicate like unto the coral—of the babe that was lying 
under it, the car upturned and fell down. It crushed the 
pots containing various kinds of delicious liquids, and lay 
with its wheeis, pole and yoke shattered. Yashoda and other 
women of Vraja, who had assembled there for the festivity 
of Gthdutka, and Nanda and others, were terrified, seeing 
this wonderful phenomenon, They wondered how the car 
became shattered and upturned of its own accord,’ The 
boys, who saw the up-turning of the car, said to the cow- 
herds and their wives whose intellects were bewildered, 
“There is no doubt that this car has been thrown up by the 
feet of this crying baby.” The cow-herds did not believe 
he words spoken by the boys, For, verily they were 
norant of the immeasurable prowess of that boy Krishna. 
» Yasodha, afraid of evil spfrits, took up her crying son 
lap, and suckled him; she made the Vipras perform 
as accompanied with Suvétas, for the well-being 
5 


34 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


of her child. Then the car with its appendages’ was re- 
placed in its former position by strong cow-herds. The 
Vipras then performed adoration, having offered oblations of 
curd,fried grain, the sacred grass and water. The benedictions 
of the true-natured Brahmanas, who are free from jealousy, 
pride, a fault-finding tendency, harmfulness, falsehood and. 
haughtiness, never go for nothing. For this reason, Nanda, 
bringing the boy, bathed him in water purified by the Brah- 
manas with Maxtras of the Rik, Yaju and Séma Veda, and 
mixed with Oskadhis. Then he (Nanda) having made them 
pronounce benediction on the boy, and offer oblations on, 
the fire, gave unto them palatable and sweet-flavoured rice. 
For the welfare of his son, he gave to the twice-born ones, 
cows possessing all good qualities and adorned with cloths, 
garlands, and golden chains. The Brahmanas, in their turn, 
uttered benedictions on the boy. Whatever benedictions, 
the devout Brahmanas versed in the Vedas had said, were all 
fruitful. For verily, these benedictions can never go for 
nothing, 

One day, when the chaste Yasodha, placing her son on 
her lap, was caressing him, she felt that her child had grown 
heavy like unto a mountain peak. And she was unable to 
bear him any longer on her lap. The wife of the cow-herd, 
struck with wonder and groaning under the burden of her 
son, placed him.down on the ground. Then she began to pray 
unto the Supreme Lord of the universe and hastened to 
call the Brahmanas. At that moment, a Daitya Trinavarta 
by name, a servant of Kansa, being sent by him came in 
the form of whirl-wind and stole away the child, The 
Daitya, agitating the whole of Gokula, blinded the eyes of its 
inhabitants with particles of dust. He gave forth a terrific shou 
which the cardinal quarteis echoed forth. In a mome 
the pasture was covered with dust and darkness: 
“Yasodha did not see her son, where she had plate 
Bewildered, nobody could see himself or others. - 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 35, 


were sorely oppressed with the gravels thrown at them by. 
Trinévarta. Thus when showers of dusts were being 
poured down by the whirl-wind of vehement velocity, the 
helpless mother, unable to trace the path her son had been 
carried by, began to roam hither and thither; and not find- 
-ing him began to bewail falling on the ground, like unto the 
cow, the calf of which has died. When the whirl-wind had 
subsided and the shower of dust had ceased, the Gopees 
hearing the lamentations of Yasodha, hastened there, and not 
finding the son of Nanda, began to cry aloud having their 
hearts sorely afflicted with grief and theie faces overflooded 
with tears. In the ‘meantime 7riénxévarta in the form of 
the whirl-wind, having stolen Krishna, with great difficulty 
reached the sky. His velocity also diminished in conse- 
uence of having been compelled to bear his (Krishna’s) 
reavy burden. But beyond the region of the heavens, he 
could not go. Oj account of the boy’s extraordinary weight, 
the Daitya thought him to be a mountain. Though desirous 
of doing so, he could not leave this wonderful child, for he 
(the child) had embraced him by the neck. On the other hand, 
being clasped by the neck, the Daitya became powerless and 
his eyes came out of their sockets. Then giving forth an in- 
distinct groan and deprived of life, he fell down on Vraja 
with the boy hanging by his neck. In consequence of his 
falling from the skies ona stone, the body and the limbs 
of that terrible Daitya were shattered. The bewailing 
women of Vraja, gathering there, saw him lying, like unto the 
Asura Pura cloven by the arroys of Rudra. Seeing Krishna 
hanging on its breast, they were struck with amazement and 
taking him restored him to his mother. Surely the cow-herds 
and there wives, headed by Nanda, were greatly delighted, 
having regained their blessed son who had been carried 


“ay in the skies by the monster aud who had escaped from 
very jaws of death. ‘Surely this is greatly marvellous, 
his boy placed within the reach of death by ,the 


36 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


Rikshasha, should escapé it and return back! This cruel 
and Crooked one hath, in consequence of his own sins, met 
with his destruction. Verily the pious on account of their 
similarity of attitude (towards all), are liberated from fear. 
What rigid penances have we undergone, what adoration 
have we offered to Adhokhajaya, what charitable -deeds 
the form Purta and Jstha have we performed,.and what 
friendship have we shown to beings, iu consequence of which, 
this boy, who was (nothing less than) dead, has been 
restored to us to enhance the joy of his kinsmen.’ 

Seeing these numerous marvels take place in his own 
residence of Vrikatvana, the cow-herd Nanda again and 
again temembered the words of Vasudeva, and was strucle 
swith wonder. 

Oue day the seccetat Yasodha placing her son on her 
lap and overwhelmed with affection, was suckling him with 
the milk that was distilling from her breast. O king! when 
the bov was about to finish sucking, and when his mother 
was caressing liis face beaming with beautiful smiles, the 
boy yawned. And to her amazement, she saw inside the 
boy’s mouth, the sky, the upper aid the nether regions, the 
Zodiac, thé heavenly quarters, the sun, the moon, the fire, the 
atmosphere, the oceans, islands, mountains and _ their 
daughters (rivers), forests, and the mobile and immobile 
creation. O king! she of eyes resembling those of a gazelle, 
suddenly seeing the universe inside his mouth, was seized 
with 4 tremour; and ‘being struck with wonder, she skut 
hér twp eyes. ° i 


2 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 29 


twenty years again are uselessly passed away when his body 
is beseiged by senility and rendered, infirm by it. The 
remaining portion of his term of life is also mis-spent, 
during which period he, maddened as it were, is en- 
grossed in his home through the influence of powerful 
infatuation and sorrow-abounding desires. For what 
person, of unsubdued senses, ever endeavours to set his 
self free that is attached to (earthly) habitation and fast 
bound by the firm bonds of affection? Who ever re- 
linquishes his thirst for wealth which is cherished more 
than life itself, and which, a thief, a servitor and a merchant 
purchase (secure) in exchange for their dearest lives (7. e. at 
the risk of their dearest lives). How can a person fore- 
go the sweet.company of his tender-hearted wife, as also 
the dalliance and the charming coversagion he holds with 
her? How can one, tightly bound by the ties of 
friendship, ‘relinquish the company of his friends? What 
person, whose heart is captivated by lisping infants, can 
deprive himself of their association ? What being, remember- 
ing his sons, his beloved daughters absent at their. fathers- 
in-laws’, his brothers, his sisters, his poor parents, his house 
decorated with handsome and valuable furnitures, his family 
profession, his servants and the beasts (he has reared up)— 
can ever renounce them? Like a chrysalis (envelaped in 
a sheath without any out-let) what person, whose desires are 
‘unsatiated, who performs acts. on account of intense 
cupidity and -whose infatuation is inveterate, is ever tired 
of these (above-mentioned objects)? For he holds in high 
estimation sexual pleasure and enjoyments pertaining 
to the palate. Completely intoxicated, he does not 
“Perceive that by cherishing his kinsmen, his own term of 
existence is being shortened, and his aim of life, thwarted. 
Attached to his relatives he does not feel any misery, 
though his heart is always afflicted by the three different 
kinds of misery, That being of uncentrolled senses and 


. 


30 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 3 


unsatisfied desires, who is occupied in rearing his kinsmen, 
has his heart so mucli bent on money-making that he com- 
mits theft even knowing the punishments inflicted in this and 
the other world, on him who robs other:people of their money. 
O sons of Asuras! even one, versed in the scriptures, can 
not ameliorate his soul‘’s condition, if he is given to the 
cherishing of his family, for then he also,- like an 
infatuated one, imbibing a feeling of difference between 
his own and _ others, is ‘encompassed by darkness. 
Thus fast bound, nowhere and by no means has any 
lascivious person been able 'to- emancipate his own self, 
for he is a mere “plaything in the hands of women, in 
whom are forged the fetters (which bind us in shape of -chil- | 
dren.) Therefore, O sons of Daityas! renouncing at a dis- 
tance the company of these Asuras absorbed in mundane 
objects, do you approach the Primary divinity Narayana, 
who is the bestower of Apavarga (or final emancipation) 
which is very much coveted by the companionless sages. 
O sons of Asuras neither is there any very great difficulty 
in propitiating the Being that never lapseth, for he is 
the soul of all created beings and is present every- 
where. That almighty immutable Lord is the only prime 
soul, that pervadeth the higher and the lower orders of beings, 
the whole range of creation commencing with the im- 
mobile objects and ending in Brahma, the inanimate world, 
the transformations of earth &c, the elements, the AZahat, the 
cardinal principles, and the similarity and reciprocity that 
is found between them, Though in reality unascertainable, 
and inimitable, he is ascertained in two different ways, « 
namely as the pervador, inthe form of souls in all created 
beings, and asthe thing pervaded, in the form of all pei- 
ceptible objects. On account of his having concealed his 
supremacy by means of his illusive energy the province of 
which is the creation of objects of perception, the supreme 
Lord is conceived as an image of ecstacy which can only 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 31 


be felt by the mind. So leaving behind your Asura-. 
nature, do you begin to show generosity and friendliness 

towards all created beings. By this act Adhkokshaja (Vishnu) 

‘will become propitious unto you. What is there unattain- 
able (by beings) when the Lord, who hath neither 

end nor beginning, is pleased (with them)? What need have 

we,—who are constantly singing his glory, and drinking nectar 

from his two feet—of righteousness &c, the natural outcome 

of meritorious acts, as well as of the final beatitude that is 
coveted by all. I do acknowledge that, righteousness, 
wealth and desires, which are called 7révarga, as also the 
learning relating to it (7rzvarga), the systems of logic, polity, 
and the rules of varieus professions set forth in the Nzgames 
(Vedas), ave all true, for they -help one to merge his self in 
the Supreme Lord, who is acquainted with his inmost heart. 

This pure knowledge, which is.obtained with great diffi- 
culty, was imparted to Narada by Narayana, the friend of 
men. It may be possessed by those corporeal beings who 
are covered v"th the dust from the lotus-feet of the indigent 
and devoted votaries of the almighty Lord. In days gone 
by, I heard this pure Bhagavata reltgion fraught with imme- 
diate and mediate knowledge, from the divine sage Narada 
of godly presence. 

‘THE AUSPICIOUS SONS OF THE DalrTyAS said:—O Prah- 
Jada! neither we nor you, know any other precep- 
tor than the two sons of Sukracharyya, who have been tutor- 
ing us from the time when we were mere infants. On the 
other hand itis very difficult for a child shut up inside the 
seraglio to enjoy the company of sages. ‘Therefore O mild- 
est being! if there is any reason to make us believe in 
yqar version, unfold it unto us and thereby dispel our 
doubts. . 


CHAPTER VIL. 


(ue AUSPICIOUS NARADA said:—Questioned in the 
above manner by the sons of the Daityas, the Asura, the 
great devotee of the Lord, was very much delighted, and 
remembering my words answered them thus ;— 

THE AUSPICIOUS PRAHLADA said :—When our father resort- 
ed to the Mandara mountain to perform religious austerities, 
the celestials began to make extensive preparations to launch 
in a war against the Danavas.. Then Vasava and the other 
deities said : “By our good fortune this sinful persecutor of the 
worlds has been eaten up by his own impiety like unto a ser- 
pent eaten up by ants.’’’ The leaders of the host of Asuras, 
having heard of this ‘tremendous equipment for war, of 
the celestials, were greatly frightened; and when attacked 
by the gods, they hurriedly fled to all the different quarters 
of heaven. Every one, in his haste and anxiety to save 
his own life, could not even spare one glance at his wife, 
sons, money, relatives, domesticated beasts, house and 
household furniture. The immortals, desirous of victory, 
ransacked and devastated the residence of the king (Hira- 
nyakagipu). Indra took my mother—the foremost of the 
queens—prisoner. At that time roving at will (over the uni- 
verse), the divine sage Narada met her on,the way, while she 
was being transported (to Heaven) bewailing like a female 
osprey and trembling with fear. Narada said, ‘O lord lke 
the celestials ! . Thou ought not to carry off this guiltless 
woman. O thou of eminent parts! leave, let go this most 
chaste lady, the wife of another person.’’ 

THE AuSPICIOUS INDRA said:—Within her womb, she 
contains the unbearable seed of the enemy of the celestials. 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 33 


So let her remain with me until the time of her delivering 
a child, when securing the way to my own welfare (by 
killing her issue) I shall let her go. 

The auspicious Narada said, “This one (foetus) is free 
from all impiety, and is great on account of his own 
excellent qualities ; he is a very devoted worshipper of the 
almighty Lord. This mighty follower of the endless Being 
is not destined to meet his death through thine agency.” 
Thus spoken to, Indra acceptitg the words of the godly 
sage NArada, let my mother go; and then out of reverence to 
me, who am beloved 'of the Endless One, several times circum- 
ambulating her, repaired'to Heaven. Thereupon the ascetic 
took my mother td his own hermitage, and consoling her 
‘said, ‘O daughter} reside at this place, until the arrival of 
your husband.’ Then saying ‘yea,’ (to the words of Narada) 
shorn of fear she lived near the divine sage, up to the time 
when the lord of the Daityas. desisted from his severe as- 
-ceticism. There that chaste and pregnant lady began to 
serve the sage with great reverence, with a view to 
Secure the well-being of her foetus, as also to obtain the 
power of bringing forth (her issue) at her will. The all- 
pow-rful and kind-hearted, sage, fulfilled both these (de- 
sires) of hers. He also, alluding to me, taught her the real 
nature of religion, and instilled pure knowledge, into her 
mind. The remembrance of these teachings was effaced 
out of my mother’s mind on account of her being a woman 
as also for the length of the (intervening) time. But even 
now, the memory of these teachings has not left me, who 
am favored by the sage. So, if you believe in’ my words, 
sn account of this belief of yours, your intellect, as well as 
that of boys and women shall be, like mine, proficient (in 


discarding egoism). As through the agency of Kala—whose 
manifestation is the change introduced in the state of objects 
—the tree remaining unaltered, its fruits undergo modifi- 
cations, so on account of the self-same agency, the six visible 


5 


34 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


transformations beginning with birth, belong to the body and 
not to the soul. The soul is‘eternal, undeteriorating, un- 
stained, unique, possessed of the highest knowledge,the recep- 
tacle of the universe, immutable, self-effulgent, the primary 
cause, the pervador (of all things), companionless, and 
infinite. With the help of these twelve superior attributes 
of the soul, the intelligent being renounces the delusion- 
sprung false notions, namely the body constituting the ego and 
that the body is mine. Just as a goldsmith, well-acquainted 
with the process of making gold, may obtain it, by melting 
gold-stones found in the gold mines, so a person conversant 
with the functions of the supreme spirit, practising in this 
body (which may be compared to a holy spot) an abstract 
meditation on the soul, attains to the state of Brahma. By 
the holy teachers, the Prakritis have been innumerated 
as eight, their attributes as three, and other evolutions 
as sixteen; but the soul is said to be_one, on account 
of its being completely connected swith every one 
of these. This material structure is made up fof a 
combination of all these. It is divided,- into mobile 
and immobile. The Purusha ought to be sought in this 
body and is there realised, being separated from other 
gross objects, by a person who (adopting the following line 
of reasoning) réjects everything saying “not this” “not this” 
(¢.e., this is not the Purusha). By means of an abstract 
deliberation on creation, preservation, and destruction, per~ 
formed with the help of an understanding conversant with the 
connective and distinctive relation between the soul and 
the body and also with the help of a pure mind, the Purusha 
eught to be sought im this material structure, by a person of ~ 
cool temperament. The states of wakefulness, slumber 
and dream are the functions of consciousness. He, who 
is cognisant of these three States, is tle superintendent 
and the primzval Purusha. As the presence of the air is 
perceived by means of the fragrance with which it is fraught, 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 35 


‘ so is the real nature, of the soul, to be apprehended by 


means of the connection, existing between the soul and all 
these three different encompassing modifications of 
consciousness which originate out of our actions and are 
permeated with the three essential Principles (of goodness, 
energy, and dulness), This conciousness is, as it were, the 
entrance tv this world, and its qualities and. actions cons- 
titute the fast_ bonds (of this existence) ;it has its source in 
ignorance and though unreal in its nature yet it has the 
appearance Of réality, as in experiencing a dream. Therefore 
you ought to perform the extirpation of the seeds of action 
permeated with the three essential Principles, by means of 
the Yoga, that causes the death (stops) of the current of 
consciousness. Of the thousand different expedients men- 
tioned, for the extirpation of those seeds of action this one— 
a pious attachment towards the almighty Lord arising out 
of a due performance of the following acts—was inculcated 
by the potent Narada. The six enemies of mankind, (the ram- 
pant passions) completely subdued—by serving a preceptor, 
by showing reverence unto him, by offering unto him 
all objects that one secures, by keeping company with 
the pious devotees, by worshipping the Lord, by a 
regardful hearing of the recital of His account, by a 
narration of His attributes and deeds, by a meditation on his 
lotus feet, by a perception and an adoration of all his different 
forms, by conceiving the Almighty Lord Hari present in 
all created things and (for this reason) by thinking all beings 
as pious,—create a reverence towards the Lord, by means 
of which an attachment to the Almighty VAsudeva is 
secured. When on account of his having heard a delineation 
of the Lord’s deeds, incomparable qualities, and prowess 
displayed under the forms assumed in His sport—a person, 
with the hair of his body erect out of great delight, his tears 
flowing, and his voice rendered inarticulate, and his neck 
up-turned, sings, dances and shouts out in joy, when 


36 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


like one possessed by an evil spirit, he laughs or laments, 
or contemplates or greets people, when devoid of bashful- 
ness, totally absorbed in introspection, and always giving 
forth sighs, he cries aloud, O Hari} O Lord of the Universe } 
O Narayana! then is he set free from all bondages ; and his 
mind and body on account of his contemplating on: the 
deeds of the Lord are ynified with those’ of the 
Lord; and his ignorance and desires being consumed by 
means'of an application of the great fire of devotion, he 
attains to Adhokshaja. The wise consider the realisation of 
Adhokshaja within the mind as a means that stops the (ever- 
rolling wheel of worldliness of that corporeal being whose 
mind is still impure z e. full of attachment, love &c. 
They also consider it to be the happiness of complete disso- 
lution in Brahma z. e final emancipation. Therefore do you 
adore within your hearts the Lord of hearts. O Sons of 
Asuras! no very great effort isto be made in worshipping 
Hari who is present in one’s heart like unto the sky in the space 
and whois the intimate friend of one’s own soul... What 
is the good of earning worldly prosperity which is commonly 
attained to by all corporeal beings. Riches, a wife, beasts, 
sons and others, habitations, this earth, the elephants, the 
treasury, all prosperity, the objects of perception and one’s, 
desires, are all transient. Those can do, a little service 
to mortals, whose duration of life is very uncertain. Equally 
susceptible to destruction are the different Lokas (Heaven, 
Hell &c.) for they are attaind to by -performers of sacrificial 
actions; though comparatively better, they are not completely 
purged of impurity. Therefore with a view to realise the 
self, do you worship that supreme Lord by means of the 
above mentioned devotional mode of adoration, whose foible 
is never seen nor heard of. In this world, when a man, 
proud of his learning, repeatedly performs certain actions 
aiming at a certain result, he is sure to meet with one 
quité contrary to what he desires. In this world the ultimate 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM: 37 


aim, of a person performing actions, is to enhance his 
happiness thereby or liberate himself from misery. But, be 
who on account of his inaction, was formerly covered 
with all happiness, is sure to encounter misery when 
he strives to perform acts; the body, for the happi- 
ness ,6f which, in this tworld a man, by performing acts 
having particular ends, wishes the fruition of his desires— 
is fragile, alien to himself, and comes to his soul and goes 
away from it, at random. When even one’s body is not his 
own, there is no use of expressing in so many words, that 
chrildren, wives, habitations, riches, kingdoms, treasury; 
elephants, ministers, servants, relatives, and other objects 
of affection, which are distinct from the body, are also 
alien to one’s self. What will the soul, the ocean, the 
container of the sentiment of eternal ecstacy, do with these 
contemptible things, which, though appearing to be real ‘are 
as a matter of fact unreal, and which are, equally with 
body, subject to destruction. 

O sons of Asuras! ascertain what benefit will he, bear- 
ing a form, reap out of actions, seeing that he is troubled 
by his pristine deeds even when placed in Nisazka and other 
states. A corporeal being, through the agency of his body 
that follows in the wake of the soul, begins to perfom actions. 7 
By means of these acts he increases the number of bodies | 
(which he will be obliged’to assume). Both his actions and 
number of bodies (he will be compelled to assume) are in- 
creased on account of.his want of knowledge. ‘Therefore, 
by a banishment of desires, one should worship the soul 
and impartial Supreme Lord Hari, on whom are wealth, 
desires and righteousness dependent. Hari is the Soul, the 
Lord, and the beloved of all created beings. He knows 
their inmost hearts, for they are created by a combination 
of the great elements, which again are created by himself. 
A celestial, an Asura, or aman,a Yakshas, or a Gandharva, 
becomes blessed when they adore the feet of Mukunda 


38 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


(Krishna); so also we shall be blessed through an adoration 
of Hari. O sons of Asuras! neither the fact of being a 
twice born one, a celestial or an anchorite, nor character 
nor experience, nor charity, nor religious austerity, 
nor sacrifice, nor purity, nor observance of vows, is 
capable of bringing above the satisfaction of Mukunda. Hari 
is pleased only by means of unalloyed devotion. Shorn 
of devotion the other things recited are mere moc- 
keries. Therefore, O Danavas! direct your devotion towards 
the almighty Lord Hari, the soul of all created beings by 
considering every thing else as your own selves, O sons 
of Daityast by this devotional mode of worship, Yakshas, 
Rakshashas, women, Indras, the dwellers of Vraja (referring 
to the dealers in milk of that city), birds, deer and other 
sinful beings, all live, attainingythe self-same nature with 
Achyuta (refers to immortality). An undeviating devotion 
towards Govinda, as also the fact of viewing Him in every 
direction, is said to he the Sumnum bonum, to which in this 
life a person can attain. 


00 


CHAPTER VIIT. 


eee 


| AUSPICIOUS NARADA said :-——Thus all the sons of the 
Daityas, listening to his (Prahlada’s) words, accepted them, 
considering them to be unblamable. They totally rejec- 
ted what they had been taught by their preceptors. There- 
upon the sons of the Daitya priest, finding the understand- 
ing of their pupils bent on the realisation of a single end, 
became very much terrified, and without delay represented 
the true state of affairs to the king. His (the king’s) 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM, 39 


body began to tremble, as he became possessed with wrath. 
Reprimanding Prahrada, who was undeserving of such 
treatment, in rude language, he made up his mind to slay 
him. Breathing like a down-trodden serpent, he, cruel- 
hearted by nature, looking towards his self-subdued son with 
his vicious and crooked eyes, thus spoke unto him, 
who, out of humility, remained in a bent posture with his 
hands folded. 

THE AUSPiCiouUS HIRANYAKACIPU said :—O'ill-mannered, 
wicked-minded wretch ! thou art trying to destroy my race. 
Today I shall send thy inert seif into the abode of Yama, 
for thou hast transgressed my commands. O foolish one?! 
like one undaunted, thou dost always violate the commands, 
proceeding from me who becoming wrathful, the three worlds 
with their respective rulers begin to shake. Speak what is 
thy source of power. 

THE AUSPICIOUS PRAHRADA said :—O king! He is not 
the source of power to myself only but also to thyself and 
to other powerful beings. The superior and inferior Brahma 
and others, the mobile and the immobile creation, have all 
been brought under His subjection (by His power). He is the 
Lord, He is Time, His prowess is great, He is energy, He 
is patience, His self is composed of strength, the senses, and 
goodness. That supreme Being, the lord of the three essen- 
tial Principles (of Goodness, Dullness and Energy) by means of 

‘His own, energy creates, preserves and destroys this universe. 
Annihilate this thine Asura nature, and hold thy mind 
equable. There exists no (greater) enemy than the unsubdued 
mind that always goes astray from the right path. This 
(holding the mind equable) constitutes the great and 

-perfect adoration of the endless Being. Some (deluded) peo- 
ple like thyself, without first having conquered the robbers 
(refering to the six rampant passions) that rob us of every- 
thing, (valuable) think themselves as conquerors of the 
ten cardinal quarters. But the pious man, who hath subdued 


s 
40 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


his self, who looks upon all corporeal beings with an equal 
eye, and who is learned, has got no enemies born out of his 
own ignorance. 

THE AUSPICIOUS HIRANYAKACIPU said :—It is evident 
that thou art desirous of dying, for thou art greatly 
vaunting. O evil-minded one! surely the words ‘of the 
dying only become incoherent. O ill-fated one! thou hast 
asserted that, there is another lord of the worlds besides 
my own self; where is he? If he is present every- 
where why then is he not seen in this pillar? I shall 
sever thy head from thy trunk, in consequence of your use- 
less vaunting.. Let thy. Hari, in whom thou art desirous 
of taking refuge, protect thee now. 

Thus out of rage repeatedly censuring in vile language, 
his son—the great devotee (of Krishna)—the potent Asura, 
grasping his sword, jumped down from his beautiful throne 
Then that wondrous-powerful being struck the pillar 
with his fist. Thereupon a greatly terrific sound was 
heard inside it, in consequence of which this mundane 
shell (the earth) was rent asunder. O best of 
men! having heard this sound which had reached 
their respective residences, Brahm&a and other celes- 
tials, thought that the destruction of their abodes had 
taken place. Bent on _ forcibly slaying his son, he, 
when displaying his prowess, heard this unheard of 
sound. But in that assembly he could not find out the 
source, which had terrified the leaders of the Danava-host, 
the adversaries of the celestials. Then to prove the 
truth of His servant’s words and also His omnipresence 
the Lord came into the view of the assembly on 
the self-same pillar, bearing a form neither human nor 
celestial. Looking everywhere for the being that gave 
forth the sound, Hiranyakacipu saw this figure issuing 
forth from the pillar. “O wonderful! this is neither a 
beast. nor a man! what is this ! surely this figure 


. 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 41 


consists of a combination partly of the form of aman 
and the king of beasts!’ When he arrived at this 
conclusion, before him stood the fearful figure of 
Nrisingha with eyes, lustrous like melted gold, with 
a blooming countenance covered with braids of knotted 
hair and with many terrible teeth, with a tongue pliant like 
a sword and sharp like the edges of a razor, and with 
an aspect dreadful on account of a frown; with an erect 
and raised pair of ears, with a facial aperture and a 
mouth wonderfully wide like the caverns of a mountain, 
with jaws looking horrible in consequence of being 
parted, with a body reaching the heavens, with a short 
and sinewy neck, a broad chest and a slender waist, 
with a body covered with downs white like the rays of the 
moon, with innumerable arms hanging on all sides, with 
nails serving the purposes of weapons, with a body hard 
to approach, He was slaying with his own personal 
weapon (the discus) as well as with other good ones, the 
hosts of the Daityas and Danavas. ‘It is certain that Hari, 
the god of the potent energy of Illusion, has fixed on this 
(novel) means of bringing about my death; but, of what . 
avail will his endeavours be?” Thus speaking the foremost 
of the Asuras, armed with a bludgeon and giving forth a 
(terrific) roar, assaulted Nrisingha, Thereat even !ike an in- 
sect falling in fire, that Asura disappeared from sight 
owing to his having been encompassed by the effulgence 
of Nrisingha. There was nothing strange in this disap- 
pearance of the Asura, representing the principle of 
dullness, in Him whose splendour is the principle of good 
ness ; for O wonderful} in times gone by He did drink in 
darkness. Thén in his wrath, the potent Asura making 
towards Nrisingha, struck him with his club of mighty 
momentum. But like the son of Tarkhya (¢. e. Garuda), 
catching a great serpent, the club-armed Diety (Gadadhara) 
caught hold of him with his bludgeon, who had been (in- 
6 


42 SRIMADBUAGABATAM. 


cessantly) striking against his person. Like a serpent that 
had escaped the clutches of the Garuda, he, slipping out of 
Nrisingha’s grasp, began to make a display his prowess. 
O Bharata! the immortals, who had been deprived of their 
abodes, now hidden behind the clouds, began to run 
down the ruler of the worlds, as worthless. Considering 
Nrisingha from whose clutches he had liberated himself 
to be afraid of his prowess, the mighty Asura, having” heen 
refreshed from his toils, grasped his sword and buckle, and 
again assaulted Him. Then finding him move up and down, 
with the velocity of a hawk following the motions of his 
sword and buckle, so as not to expose any of his weak points, 
the wonderous-powerful Hari with great rapidity again 
caught hold of him, at the same time giving forth a loud 
and shrill laughter, in consequence of the terrific sound of 
which, his eyes began to blink. Afflicted sore with the 
hold. Nrisingha had on him, like a rat seized upon by a ser- 
pent, he made every effort to get out of his grasp. But Hari, 
conveyed him near the gate of his court-house,, there 
placing him whose skin even the thunderbolt of Indra had 
not been able to scratch,—on His thighs, He, with His nails, 
rent open his body as if in sport like unto Garuda, tearing a 
poisonous snake. Then on account of His wrath, His terrible 
eyes were hard to gaze at; He licked with His tongue the ends 
of His expanded mouth; His countenance and manes were 
rendered crimson being drenched with drops of blood ; He 
wore as a garland the entrails of the Daitya. Thereupon He 
resembled ation that had slain an elephant. Then having 
left him off, whose lotus-like heart he had rooted 
out with His nails, He slew by means of His hands furnished 
with nails capable of serving the purposes of weapons, all 
the servants and followers of that lord of unconquerable hosts, 
who had taken up arms against Him.- The rain clouds 
shaken by (a touch of) His braided locks, began to scatter 
away. The splendour of the planets was eclipsed on ac- 


SRI MADBHAGABATAM. . 43 


count of his having looked towards them. Struck with his 
breath the oceans were greatly agitated.. Terrified on 
having heard His roar, the elephants guarding over the 
cardinal quarters of heaven, began to wail aloud. The 
celestial -regions pushed by clouds thrown off by His 
knotted locks flew higher and higher. The earth, afflicted 
sore underneath the heaviness of ‘his feet, was shaken off 
from its foundation. Mountains were uprooted by His velo- 
city. By His. effulgence the firmament and the cardinal 
quarters were shorn of their splendour. Nobody was able to 
approach the Lord for the purpose of serving Him; find- 
ing none who could be a match for Him in battle and dis- 
playing his concentrated radiance, He seated Himself 
in the midst of the assembly on the beautiful throne ; 
for even then His countenance continued to be dreadful 
and He retained His wrath. The foremost of; the 
Daityas—who was unbearable like the brain fever of the three 
worlds—being slain in battle by Hari, the countenances of 
the wives of the celestial, bloomed forth with excessive 
delight. They also poured showers of flowers upon Him. 
Then the concavity of the firmament was thronged with the 
numerous conveyances of the celestials desirous of séeing 
Him (Nrisingha). Thereafter they played upon kettle-drums 
and tabors and the foremost among the Gandharvas 
sang and their wives danced. And then O son, resorting 
to that assembly, the celestials, Brahma, Indra, Girisha, and 
others, the sages, the ancestral spirits, Siddhas, Vidyadharas 
the huge serpents, the Manus, the Prajapatis (lords of 
people) Gandharvas, Apsaras, Charanas, Yakshas, Kimpu- 
rushas, Vetdlas accompanied by the Kinnaras, and all the 
attendants of Vishnu,headed by Sananda and Kunanda,placed 
their folded palms on their heads and thus severally hymned 
near the place where the Lord sat with his flashing radiance. 
THE AUSPICIOUS BRAHMA said :—I bow down unto the 
endless Being whose abilities are infinite, whose might is 


44 ; SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


marvellous. Salutation unto Him of holy deeds; unto that 
One of undeteriorating self, who, in his sport, by the instru- 
mentality of the Principles, executeth the creation, the pte- 
servation and the destruction of the Universe. 

THE AUSPICIOUS RUDRA said:—The expiration of a 
Yuga is the (meet) season for Thy wrath. This puny Asura 
lies slain. O thou affectionate towards Thy worshippers ! pro-, 
tect Thy son, Thy devotee, who has sought refuge unto Thy- 
self. : 

THE AUSPICIOUS INDRA said:—O excellent one! the 
pottions, of a (sacrifice) allotted to us, have been recovéted 
(from the Daityas) by thy protecting self. The lotuses of our 
hearts, which are thine abode; and which till now, 
were seized by (a fear of) the Daityas, have been 
caused to bloom forth by thyself. O Lord! our prosperity 
which has been devoured (put am end to) by Kala, is indeed 
inconsiderable{ O Narasinghaf to them who are allowed 
to serve thyself, not to speak of other things, ever final 
beatitude is not of much consideration. 

THE AUSPICIOUS SAGES said ;—O primeval Purusha! 
that excellent religious mortification, which is the same as 
thy own energy, by virtue of which thou didst create this 
Universe permeated with thyself, and about which thou didst 
speak unto us, was all but destroyed (by the prowess of the 
Daityas). O preserver of thy votaries! Thou hast this day 
re-established the religious mortification by means of that body 
of thine, which thou hast assumed for its preservation, 

THE AUSPICIOUS ANCESTRAL SPIRITS said’ :—~By, (sheer) 
‘force he (Hiranyakagipu) used to eat the oblations offered 
unto us by our sons ; he used to drink the libations of water 
and the sesamum seed offered by them when they performed 
ablutions at the places of pilgrimage. Salutation unto that 
Nrisingha, the protector of all righteousness, who hatlr 
recovered these oblations and libations from the cavity of 

’ tis abdomen, whose body has been rent open by His nails. 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 45 


‘THE AUSPICIOUS SIDDHAS said :~By virtue of his prowess 
begot of his Yoga and. rigid austerities, that impious one, 
snatched from us our Sidhzs to which we have attained in 
consequence of our success in Yoga. O Nrisingha! we 
salute thee with our heads for thou hast sundered with 
thy nails that Daitya who was full of the pride of hig 
various achievements, 

THE VIDYADHARAS said :—That ignorant one, elated with 
his prowess and energy, by force withdrew from us the 
learning we acquired by our individual capabilities. We 
eternally bow down unto that kind-hearted Nrisingha, who 
hath slain this Daitya in battle even as a beast. 

THE AUSPICIOUS SERPENTS said :—Salutation unto thee 
who hast afforded delight unto our wives by tearing open. the 
breast of that sinful one who wrested the gems of our hoods 
and our beautiful wives from us. 

THE Auspicicrous MANuS said :—O Lord} we are the 
Manus, the executors of thy commandments. Our performance, 
of the rites pertaining to our sect and mode of existence, 
was hindered by this son of Diti. This crooked one has been 
‘completely annihilated by thyself. O Lord! what shall we 
- do unto thee ? command thy servants. 

THE AUSPICIOUS LORDS OF PEOPLE said:—O supreme 
Lord! we the lords of thy creation, are thine; we are created 
by thee. Here ties he with his heart rent (by thee), by 
whom prohibited to do so we did not create people for a 
long while. O thou whose semblance is all goodness | this 
thine incarnation is surely auspicious unto the worlds. 

THE auspicious GANDHARVAS said:—O lord! we are 
thy dancers ; we sing and dance. That one, who by dint of his 
prowess, might and energy exacted (to himself) our services, 
is now reduced by thee to this condition, Can anybody 
treading on evil path, expect to reap good ? 

THE AusPiciouS CHARANAS said:—O Hari} thy lotus- 
feet are the means of emancipation from this world. We 


46 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


have betaken to them as our shelter. O Lord! this Asura, 
who was a terror to the hearts of the pious, is slain. 

THE AUSPICIOUS YAKSHAS said:—By performing thy 
desirable deeds we have become chiefs among thy followers. 
By this son of Diti, we were made his carriers. O thou who 
puttest in order the twenty-four essences of things! O Nara- 
hari! coming to know the affliction of the people caused 
by him, thou hast reduced him to his five constituent 
elements. 

THE AUSPICIOUS KIMPURUSHAS said :—We are the Kim- 
putushas (7.e., despicable beings), buf thou art the Lord and 
the illustrious Being. .This (Daitya evil wight) on whom the 
pious have uttered “ fie’’ is now destroyed by thee. 

THE AUSPICIOUS VAITALIKAS (CELESTIAL BARDS) said :-—~— 
We used to obtain immense adoration by chanting thy un- 
stained glory in assemblies and in place’ of sacrifices. O 
great Soul} this wicked wight, who appropriated this our 
adoration to himself, has now been put an end_ to, by thee, 
even as a malady. 

THE AUSPICIOUS KINNARAS said :—O Lord! We are the 
Kinnaras, thine own followers. We were forced by the 
son of Diti to perform his command without any remunera- . 
tion whatever. O Hari, that cruel tormentor is now des- 
troyed by thee. O Lord, O Narasingha } be thou henceforth 

the source of our prosperity. 

THE AUSPICIOUS ATTENDANTS OF VISHNU said:—O thou 
that givest shelter to ourselves! this day we have seen 
‘the wonderful figure,—partly human and partly celestial— 

, thou hast assumed. This figure is the source of all auspici- 
ousness of the worlds. O Lord! this Daitya who had been 
the executor of thy commands was cursed by the Vipras. 
This destruction, of him by thee, we take to be an outcome 
of favor. 


a we 9 Fane 


CHAPTER \x. 


Was AuspiciouS NARADA said :—Thus the celestials and 
other heavenly beings headed by Brahma and Rudra, were 
unable to get near him, as he was hard of beirg 
approached to, on account of his having been possessed with 
rage. Even the gbddess of prosperity herself, was sent by 
the gods (to approach him). But seeing that wonderful 
unseen and unheard of figure she also was seized with 
terror and could not get near him. Thereupon BrahmA 
sent Prahlada who was standing near him _ saying 
unto him, ‘QO son! approach and propitiate the Lord 
who hath waxed wrath on thine own father. “Then be it 
so,” so speaking, O king! that lad, the illustrious devotee 
of the great One, calmly approached Him, and with his 
hands folded, bowed down unto Him prostrating his body 
on the pavement. Finding the boy fallen at the root of 
his feet, the Lord was filled with a kindly feeling; then 
raising this child who is capable of dismissing the terror 
of those whose hearts are afraid of the most piosonous ser- 
pent, the Destroyer (Kala), He placed His lotus-like hands on 
his head. By a touch of His hands he became purged of all 
inauspiciousness and instantly the knowledge of the Supreme 
Brahma was revealed unto him. Contented, he held, on his 
breast, the lotus feet of the Deity. The hair of his body 
stood erect; his heart became drenched with a stream of 
affection ; and his eyes overflowed with tears. Then fixing 
his eyes and heart on Him (the Lord) and with due concen- 
tration and singleness of purpose he praised Hari in words 
that were indistinct on-account of his great devotion. 

THE AUSPICIOUS PRAHLADA said :—The celestials headed 
by Brahma, the sages and the Siddhas whose understanding 


48 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


is solely pervaded by the Principle of Goodness were unable 
to propitiate the Lord by means of their stream of eloquence 
and their very many qualities. How can Hari then be 
pleased with myself who belong to the inquitous race of 
the Asuras? I consider riches, noble lineage, personal 
beauty, rigid mortification, a knowledge of the Shastras, 
the keenness of the senses, amiability of person, courage, 
might, diligence, prudence and Yoga, of no avail, in the 
adoration of the Supreme Male Being; for indeed that al- 
mighty Lord was satisfied with the leader of the elephant-herd 
on account of his great reverence (towards Him). I con- 
sider even a Sapacha (one who cooks andjeats dog’s meat, 
a Chandala) who hath dedicated his mind, his deeds, 
his riches, his life to the Lord to be worthier than 
that Vipra who though possessing the above men- 
tioned twelve qualifications, is disinclined to worship the 
lotus-like feet of the lotus-navelled Deity. The former 
sanctifies his race, whilst, the latter of immense’ pride, can- 
not do so. Enriched with his own profits the great.Lord does 
not accept hongur from this ignorant one with. a view to 
promote his own interests. But he does so, out of kind- 
ness towards fthem. The honour which a person offers unto 
the illustrious Deity, redounds on them, even as the decora- 
tions of one’s countenance goes to enhance the beauty of 
its image reflected on a mirror. Therefore though despi- 
cable by birth, and dismissing my fear I shall delineate the - 
glories of the Lord with all my soul and to the best of my 
knowledge. By a recital of the glory of the Lord, even a per- 
son, who in consequence of his own illusion has entered into 
this earth, and has accepted the woes of this life, is puri-- 
fied. O Lord! all these terrified Deities, Brahma, and others, 
all the executors of thine edicts, whose semblance is the 
principle of goodness, are not like unto ourselves, 
{for they attach themselves unto thee out of reverence, 
‘whilst: we do so out of enmity). For the good and pros. . 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 49 


perity: of this Universe, as also for thine own enjoyment, 
thou engagest in these sports manifesting ‘thyself in beauti- 
ful incarnation. Therefore renounce thy wrath now that 
Asura is slain by thee. Even a pious man is delighted at 
the destruction of a serpent or a scorpion. The worlds have 
attained tranquility. They are now waiting to see the sub- 
sidence of thy wrath. O Nrisingha! all men will recollect 
this form of thine, in order to drive away their fears. I am 
afraid of thee who art even now bearing a dreadful counte- 
nance and a tongue, eyes (lustrous) like the sun, fierce frown 
and a terrible set of teeth; of thee whose garland consists. 
of entrails, whose manes are reddened with blood, whose 
ears are erect like a spear, and whose roar hath struck terror 
into the hearts of the elephants guarding the cardinal 
guarters ; of thee who hast slain thine enemy with the ends 
of thy nails. But, O thou, that art affectionate towards 
the helpless! I am afraid of the terrible and insufferable 
woe that is. met with (when beings are whirled) on the 
wheel of his existence? Bound fast by my actionsI have 
been thrown by them, in the midst of ferocious creatures. 
O holiest of holies! when shalt thou, propitiated, recall me 
unto the roots. of thy feet, which are the shelter and the 
(cause of) emancipation of beings. In all my different states 
of existence I have been burning with the fire of grief 
originating out of my separation from friends and from 
meeting with foes;'the remedy of misery is misery. 
Therefore, O infinite lord! I am incessantly wandering, 
conscious of an individuality in the body, &c.; instruct me 
in the Yoga that lays down the rules of serving thee. O 
Nrisingha! becoming thy servant, I shall soon tide over the 
miseries that are difficult of being done so, by recounting 
the history, which had been sung before by Virinchi, of 
marvellous deeds of thine, who art the friend, beloved and 
the highest Deity. I shall then be set free from the influence 
of the passions and shall live in company of the wise whose 
7 


50 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


only abode is thy two feet. ‘In this world the remedy, pre- 
scribed against the misery of one afflicted with it, does ‘not 
prove efficacious in the case of corporeal beings who are for- 
saken by thee, even as parents cannot sometimes afford 
shelter to their son, even as physic cannot sometimes check 
a malady and even as a boat cannot help one that is sinking 
down into the sea. O Lord! whatever all other differently 
characterised agents, superior or inferior—sent by whatso- 
ever instrumentality, in whatsoever substratum, from what- 
soever cause,.in whatsoever time, for whatsoever reason, in 
whatsoever connection, from whatsoever source, for what- 
soever thing, and by whatsoever means, create or uncreate, are 
all indentified with thyself. Through a favourable look from 
the Primary Male Being, the energy of Illusion, having her 
principles agitated by time, creates the mind, which is 
permeated with actions dictated by the Vedas and counten- 
anced by custom, and which is controlled with difficulty. 
The energy of infatuation hath given unto this mind the 
sixteen evolutions (for her own enjoyment). O unborn one { 
independent of Thee who can lord over his mind, which 
isthe same as this wheel of existence? O Lord! Thou 
art that Purusha who by thy power of perception. hast 
eternally conquered the attributes of the understanding. 
Thou art Kala (Time), Thou’ hast completely brought 
‘under thy control the energy of causes and effects. O 
Almighty Deity! take me unto thy proximity, who, 
thrown by infatuation, underneath the wheel consisting of 
the sixteen different evolutions, am even now being crushed 
under it and (so) who have met with a dire disaster. I have 
come to know the real nature of the term of life, the pros 
perity and: the glory of all the rulers of the people, that 
dwell in heaven,.'which (glory &c.) is coveted by men: of 
this world. Forsooth, these (prosperity &c.) were destroyed 
éven by a contraction of the brows of my father, which 
were distorted on account of a wrathful laughter. But 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. $1 


even that father of mine has been slain by thee. Therefore 
I, who know the result of the enjoyments of corporeal beings, 
am not desirous of having longivity, prosperity and wealth 
and even the pleasures and, privileges of Virinchi which 
contribute to the gratification of the senses. Neither do I 
wish to possess the Siddhis which are capable of being des- 
troyed by thee of immense prowess, whose self is time. Convey 
me beside thine own servants. Enjoyments, which is pleas- 
ant.to hear of even as the phenomenon of mirage (which 
has no actual existence) are to be found no where. Where is 
to be found this body the hot bed of innumerable maladies ? 
That people, knowing their true nature, do not tire of them, 
is owing to the fact ‘that they exert themselves to satiate, 
their desires by the very touch of enjoyment obtained with 
difficulty even as one tries to extinguish fire by pouring 
honey on it. O Lord, where am I born out of the Principle 
of energy in the race of the Asuras, in whom the Principle 
of Dullnesss predominates and where lieth thy grace? 
(What a great gulf intervenes them both). Out of that grace, 
thou hast, granted me the favor of placing on my head 
thy lotus-like hand which thou didst never grant even to 
Brahm&, or Bhava (Siva) or to. Rama herself. Thow hast 
not, like the lower animals, got in thyself a sensé of distinc« 
tion between the superior and inferior for thou art the soul 
and the friend of this universe. Even as the favors, bestowed. 
on people by the Heavenly Tree (Kalpa), are regulated in pro- 
portion to their services rendered unto it, so the measure of 
thy grace unto beings is regulated by the services they offer 
to thee and not by the superiority or inferiority of the servitors. 
How can I refrain from worshipping thy servants, know- 
ing that I had been saved by the divine sage Narada, taking 
me for his own, while I was falling into the pit containing a 
serpent identical with birth, along with those who had in 
consequence of their successive desires, fallen into it. O 
infinite one! I consider the death of my father and the 


§2 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


protection of, my life, (by thee) to be thy means of verifying 
the truth of the words of the sage, thy own servant. For 
my father, bent on perpetrating an impious deed, grasping 
his’ sword, had said to me! “Let that lord, who is other than 
myself, save thee, while I sever thy head.” Thy single self 
is manifest in this universe; for thou stayeth in the begin- 
ning, the middle, and. the end of it, creating, by the own 
illusive energy, this universe which is the product of the 
Principles. Thou art manifest in it and art contained in -it, as 
its protector and destroyer. O Lord { thou art identified with this 
universe of causes and effects. Again, thou art away from it. 
The sense of distinction between, this is mine and this is an- 
other’s, is an empty delusion of the mind. As the tree develops 
itself from the seed sown on the earth, as also the seed is but 
a minute portion of the tree, so the creation, manifestation, 
pteservation and destruction of this universe are emanations 
fromthee, Placing, by thine own agency, this universe 
inside thy own self, thou liest on the inundatory floods, 
inactive and absorbed in self enjoyment. Thine eyes are 
shut in Yoga. Thou hast drunk in sleep by a revelation 
of thy self. Thou stayethin the subtle fourth state (of the 
soul's existence). Therefore{neither Dullness nor the object 
of pérceptidn can associate themselves with thee. This 
universe which was hidden in thyself, is thy form. O 
Lord, thou art that Purusha, who by thy power of per- 
ception hast eternally: conquered the attributes of the under- 
grown energy of Time, who hast given unto Prakriti its attri- 
bute,—principles of Goodness, Energy and Dullness. At the 
break of thy self-concentration while thou didst lay on the 
bed consisting of the Great serpent Ananta, in the inunda- 
tory floods, out of thy navel sprang forth a large lotus, 
which was a particle of thyself. Out of this lotus originated 
this universe, even as a Ficus Indica develops itself from 
a small seed. Born out of that lotus, Brahma did not see 
.any: thing except it. Merged, for hundred. years, in. the 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. \53 


floods, and absorbed in the contemplation of outward ob- 
jects, he did not even perceive thyself, the material cause 
of this universe, though thou remained pervading him. For 
when the sprout shoots up the seed is no longer seen. 
Greatly astonished the Self-create one performed, under. the 
shelter of that lotus, rigid austerities, which in proper time 
had the effect of purifying his heart. Thereupon O lord 
he perceived thee pervading his own self composed of the 
elements, senses, and desires, even as the little flavour 
contained in the earth. Then finding thee—Mahapurusha— 
furnished with a thousand countenances, a thousand feet; 
a thousand heads, a thousand hands, a thousand noses, a 
thousand mouths, a thousand ears, anda thousand eyes, 
and decorated with various ornaments and weapons,. and 
composed of all Illusion, and thy figure (feet &c.) consisting 
of the nether and other regions, Virinchi attained to ecstacy. 
Assuming a figure having the head of a horse, and (in that 
form) slaying the two wonderous powerful Daityas, known 
under the names of Madhu and Kaitaa whobh reviled the 
Vedas, thou didst give unto him (Brahma) all the Srudis, 
as also the Principles of Dullness and Energy. The sages 
consider the principle of Goodness .to be thy most beloved 
emblem. Thus incarnating thyself as a man, a beast, a sage, 
a deity and a fish, thou dost preserve the worlds, destroy 
their enemies, and O Mahapurusha! protect the 
various systems of religion prevalent in .the different 
Yugas. In the Kaliyuga, thou dost not incarnate thyself. 
Therefore, thou art styled Zrzyuga, for having incarnated 
thyself only in the first three of them. O Lord of Vaikuntha! 
my mind, stained with impiety, occupied «with outward 
objects, uncontrollable, inflamed with desire, and overwhelm- 
ed with joy, grief, and fright, and the three kinds of affliction, 
does: not find any delight in rehearsing thy deeds, So, 
wretehed that Iam how can I with such a mind contemplate 
thy essential nafure ? O thou that never lapsest my palate 


54 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


ungratified, drags meto one’ direction, whilst my genital 
organ draws to a contrary one. So also my, abdomen, my 
touch, ‘my ears, my olifactory and ever-moving vital 
organs are drawing me to different directions. On the 
other hand, my organs of actions are annoying me 
even as rival wives often do the master of the house. Thus 
seeing this ignorant one, fallen in consequence of his own 
acts, into the Vaitarani of this mundane existence, fright- 
ened with the terror of birth, death and living through 
other’s agency, and full of notions of enmity and friend- 
ship, regarding those that are related to him and those that 
are not so, alas} alas! O thou that walkest on the other 
side (of this Vaitarani)! protect him now by helping him 
to tide over this. O Great one! what slightest effort 
of thine will be necessary to save this universe, who 
art its preceptor and the cause of its creation, preservation 
and destruction. O friend of the distressed! thou showest 
grace even unto the ignorant. As we are serving thy 
beloved ones, we need no effort of thine to save us. Having 
my mind absorbed in the ambrosia, like unto the rehearsal 
of thy prowess, I am not afraid of this Vaitarani that is 
difficult to cross over. But Iam sorry for those ignorant 
beings, who, declining (the employment of) this ambrosia 
are labouring under the burthen of maintaining their kins- 
men, with a hope of securing pleasures of the senses, whiclr 
(again) are (nothing but) unreal. O divine one! generally 
sages, desirous of emancipation,. curbing their speech, wander 
ini the solitary woods, neglecting the interests of others. But 
leaving these poor sons of Asuras behind, alone [ do not 
long for the final beatitude. Neither do I see aay other 
refuge, than thine ownself, of this deluded world. Verily, O 
lord! habitation and other enjoyments of the household life, 
are trifling. Like the scratching of the hands, they are 
fraught with a cycle of misery. The lascivious, though 
afflicted with various miseries, are never satiated with these 


“SRIMADBMAGABATAM. . i+ 7 


enjoyments; only a sober person can repress his desires, 
even as one can bear with the scratching of his hands. O 
excellent Purusha! the restraining of one’s speech, vows, 
Srutas, rigid austrities, study, the analysis of one’s own 
action, life in solitude, silent prayer’and self communion, are 
the means of attaining emancipation and generally become 
the sources of sustenance of people of unsubdued passion. 
Sometimes they also are the means of livelihood of the 
imperious, and sometimes not. Like a seed and the sprout 
developéd from it, cause and consequence are thy form 
revealed in the Vedas. Thou hast no other form, for verily 
thou art formless, only the self-concentrated, with the help 
of their devotional mode of worship, find thee contained in 
both of these (cause and consequence) even as fire is con- 
‘tained in fuel. Thou dost not reside in any thing-else. 
Thou art air, fire and earth, the sky, water, the fine essences 
the vital breaths, the senses, heart, mind and consciousness. 
Thou art everything. Thou art perceiveable by the senses 
and thou art beyond the range of perception. O Great 
one! there is nothing discovered by the mind or speech that 
is distinct from thyself. Neither the principles nor those 
(the deities presiding over them) possessed ofthese, neither 
initial consciousness (Wakat) &c., nor the mind and others, 
together with the celestials and mortals having both begin- 
ning and end, can O thou of excellent glory}! compre- 
hend thy real nature. Therefore the wise, after (careful) 
deliberation give up reading (and worship thee with single- 
minded contemplation). O most worshipful one! the act of 
bowing down, regulation of acts unto thee, prayer, adora- 
tion, recollection of thy feet, and an audition of thy glorious 
deeds ; except by the help of these six modes of serving 
thee, how can aman conceive reverence towards thee who 
art attainable only by the excellent devotees ? 
‘THE AUSPICIOUS NARADA: said :—-When his attributes had 
“been thus reverentially recounted by his devotee, that one 


56 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


transcending the principles, being appeased and. restraining 
his anger, addressed the noble Prahlada in the following 
manner. 

THE AuSPICIoUS ALMIGHTY LorD said :—O gentle 
Prahlada} good betide thee. Thou ,excellent among the, 
Asuras! Iam pleased with thyself. Ask any boon of thy 
choice? I am He, who bestows their desires on men. O 
long-lived one { he, who cannot please me, can hardly have 
a sight of myself. But when one has seen me, he ought 
not ‘to be sorry any longer. O-excellent one! wise and 
pious people, desirous of their own good, by all means, pro- 
pitiate me—the lord of all blessings. 

THE AUSPICIOUS NARADA continued :~Thus though 
tempted by very many boons capable of exciting the temp- 
tation of all men, the best of the Asuras desired none’of. 
them for he was attached to the great one with a singleness 
of purpose. 


CHAPTER X. 


r ; 

[ HE AUSPICIOUS NARADA continued :—That boy Prahlida, 
considering these (boons) as hindrances to thé practice of 
the devotional mode of adoration, was surprised and ‘said 
unto Hrishikesha. 

THE AUSPICIOUS PRAHLADA said :—Do thou not tempt 
me—addicted by nature to desires,—with these boons, afraid 
of their influence and disregarding all worldly objects, 
I have taken refuge in thee, desirous of securing final 
beatitude. O Lord! (meseems) intending to test the’ 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM.. 57. 


qualities of thy servant, thou dost send thy devotee to, 
desires, that are the cause of this worldly existence, and are 
capable of fastening the heart to it even like a knot. It. 
cannot be otherwise ; for thou art merciful, and the preceptor 
of all the regions. Those who expect to obtain worldly: 
happiness from thee, are not thy servants, but are traders 
(thirsting for gain). He that hopes to secure personal pros- 
perity at the expense of his master, cannot be said to be a 
true servant. Neither is he a true master who, in order to 
play the lord to his servant, pays him in money. I am thy. 
servant, cherishing no desire. Thou art my master, having 
no deceitful motive. Unlike other masters and servants, we 
have nothing to do with desire (on my part) and deceit (on 
thy part). O foremost of those that bestow boons! if thou 
art greatly bent on conferring my cherished boon, then O. 
Lord! I ask of thee, the boon of complete irradication of 
my desire. With the awakening of desire (in the’ heart) 
the senses, the mind, the vital principles, the body, right- 
cousness, firmness, understanding, bashfulness,. prosperity, 
energy, memory and truthfulness, are all done away with. 
When a man renounces his desires located in his heart, 
O thou of eyes like lotus-leaves! then and then ‘only he 
becomes worthy of attaining prosperity like unto thine own, 
Om} Salutation unto thee, the high-souled and almighty 
Purusha. Salutation unto Hari, the wonderful Lion, unto 
- Brahman and the Supreme Soul. 

THE ‘AUSPICIOUS ALMIGHTY ONE said :—Single-minded 
devotees .of me, like thyself, do not pray for any benefit for 
this or for the existence to come. Yet dothou enjoy these 
luxuries of the lords of the Daityas, for one Manwantara 

‘only. Drinking my beloved accounts, conceiving my 
single self--present in all other things,—to be within thyself 
and. resigning thy. acts to me by means of thy devotion, 
do thou adore me, the Lord and the presiding Deity of all 
sacrifices: Enjoying’ thy merit acquired in a previous 

8 


39 : SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


state of existence, shaking off thy sins by practising pious 
deeds, renouncing this body in the course of timé and 
spreading a pure renown, that shall be sung in Heaven, 
thou shalt attain unto me, liberated from all bondages. 
Whatsoever person remembering myself, thyself, and my 
behaviour, shal recite this prayer even now chanted by 
thee, he shall be in due time set free from the ponds of 
action. : 

THE AUSPICIOUS PRAHLADA: said :—From thee, O Great 
Lord, itclined to confer boons on me, I ask this one, that my: 
father,—-who ignorant of thy divine energy and not knowing 
thy true nature reviled thee, who with a heart pierced with 
wrath, had viewed thee, the Lord and preceptor of all the 
regions, in a false light asthe slayer of his brother and 
who had persecuted me, thy devotee,—be purified of 
all his fearful sins that are difficult to cross over. -But, 
© thou kind to the indigent! he is already | ‘purified, in con- 
Sequence of one single glance from thee. 

THE AUSPICIOUS ALMIGHTY ONE said:—O sinless one! 
thy father, with one and twenty generations upwards, has 
been purified ; since indeed, O pious one! thou, the purifier 
of thy race, hast been born in his family. Wherever my 
votaties, peaceful, impartial, pious and of good behaviour 
are present, there people are purified, even if they be vile 
like the Kikatas. O foremost of the Daityas! in this world, 
those people become devoted unto me, who do not by any 
means harm any one among the various beings, high and 
lbw, of my creation, who on account of cheris hing reverence 
towards me, have been exempted from all’ desires, and 
who are thy followers. Verily thou art examplary among 
all my devotees. 

Do thou now perform the obsequies of thy father—com- 
pletely purified—which it is the duty of a son to perform. 
O excellent owe! thy father, to whom has been born a good 
child, shall attain to the best state of existence in conse- 


SRIMADBITAGABATAM. 59 
quence of his having come into ‘contact with ‘my person. 
Occupy the place of thy father. And without transgressing 
what had been prescribed by the reciters of the Vedas, and 
concentrating thy mind on me, and being ‘devoted ‘unto me,. 
O son! do thou begin the performance of actions. 

THE AuspIciouSs NARADA said:—O king! Prahlada 
initiated into their preliminaries by the twice-born ones, 
performed as he had been told by the Great one, the obse- 
quious rites for the benefit of his father’s spirit. Then 
Brahmi, surrounded by the celestials and others, seeing Hari’s 
countenance reflecting grace, and praising Him, who hath 
assumed a: form half man and half lion, in pure accents 
said. 

THE AUSPICIOUS BRAHMA said:—O god of gods! O 
Superintendent of all the regions!.O protector of created 
beings! O First-born one}! fortunately for us, this sinful 
Asura, the tormentor of the worlds is now slain by thyself. 
This one, arrogant in consequence of his having obtained a 
boon from me, was not to be killed by any being of my 
creation. Elated with his asceticism, Yoga, and prowess he 
annihilated all righteousness. It is fortunate, that his son, 
this pious and reverential boy, has been saved from death ; 
it is fortunate also that this boy has completely attained 
to thee now. O Lord! whoever shall contemplate on thee 
O Supreme Soul! this form of thine shall protect him from all 
dangers and from the destructive God of death, 

THE AUSPICIOUS ALMIGHTY ONE said :—0O, creator! O 
Jotus-sprung one { it behoveth thee not to confer boons on 
the cruel-natured Asuras like unto offering milk unto the 
serpents, 

THE auspicious NARADA said:—O king! thus having 
spoken, the Almighty Lord disappeared thence, worshipped 
by Brahma and unperceived by other beings. Then Prahlada, 
adoring Brahma, Prajapati Mabeshward and other deities, 
who are portions of the Great Lord, saluted them with his 


7 


60 ‘SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


head bent down. Then the lotus-throned deity together with 
‘Kavya and other sages, installed Prahlada as the lord of the 
Daityas and Danavas. Then the celestials headed by 
Brahmi, greeting him, bestowed their choicest blessings on 
him. Then, O king! worshipped by Prahlada they went 
away to their respective abodes. © 

Thus were the two retainers of Vishnu, born as the sons 
of Diti. They were slain by Hari who was always present 
in their thoughts and who behaved towards them as an 
enemy. In consequence of acurse from the Brahmanas, they 
were again born as Rakshas and were known under thé 
names of Kumvakarna and Ravana of tén heads. They 
were killed by Rama’s prowess. When they lay with their 
breasts torn open with the arrows of Rama in battle, their 
souls, as in a previous existence, ‘left their bodies contem: 
plating on Rama. Then again théy were born as Sisupala and 
Krusaja (Dantavakra). Out of bitterest enmity towards 
Hari, they attained unto him even before thy very eyes. 
‘Like a cockroach attaining to the nature of the large black 
‘bee, kings inimical to Krishna, attaining'to his nature by 
meditation on their sins (sprung: out of their enmity towards 
Krishna), renounced their corporeal frames. Chaidya and 
other kings by means of an undistinguishing and unshaken 
reverence towards the Great One and by a meditation on 
‘Hari attained homogeniety with Him. I have felated. unto 
thee everything regarding the question thou didst put to me; 
‘as also everything regarding the attainment of homogeniety 
with Hari by inimical people headed by the ‘son of Dama- 
‘ghosh. This is.the holy history of the incarnation of the 
high-souled Krishna, the lord of Brahmanya: and in itis 
‘described the death of the two’ progenitors of the ‘Daityas 
race. In this history is also described in detail the character 
of the great devotee, Prahlada, his reverence, his knowledge, 
his want of attachment to mundane objects,’'the real nature 
and an’ accaunt of the deeds and glories: of “Hari, the Lord of 


"SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 61 


creation, preservation and destruction, the great reversion of 
places of the celestials and Asuras in the course of time, the 
Bhagavata religion by means of which the great One is 
realised, and ‘spiritual knowledge to all its extent. Whoever 
reverentially recites, after having listened to it attentively, 
this holy history fraught with (a description of) the prowess of 
Vishnu, is liberated -from the bonds of actions. Whoever 
attentively peruses this account of the sport of the Primary 
Purusha in the form of a lion, and also of the slaughter of 
the lord and ‘learders of the Daitya host, and whoever lis- 
tens to the recital of the holy glory of this son of the Daityas, 
the foremost among the pious, reaches those regions (of Vai- 
‘kuntha) where there is naught to fear. Surely in ‘this world 
‘ye are immensely fortunate; in as much as the sages, that 
sanctify the worlds, come to and go away from ye, and also 
the Supreme Brahma himself disguised in human shape 
resideth in your abodes. This Krishna is the Brahma, who 
is identified with the perception of the ecstacy of eternal 
‘emancipation which is sought by the illustrious sages. 
This great one is your beloved, friend, maternal cousin, soul, 
‘preceptor, executor of your commands, and worthy of your 
‘adoration. Even Bhava (Siva) and the lotus-sprung deity 
‘himself, have not been able, with the help of their intellects, 
to describe His semblance, after having attributed reality unto 
jt. May that Lord of devotees be propitious unto us, being 
avorshipped with our reverence, self-control, and abstinence 
‘from speech. O king! in days gone by, this Almighty One 
‘re-established the glory of the god Rudra, which had been 
“destroyed by Maya of endless delusive powers. 

THE KING said :—In which of his acts did May4 -destroy 
‘the glory of the God, the Lord of the worlds? And how 
‘did Krishna help in its subsequent thrift! Describe unto 
‘us all thou knowest about this matter. : 

THE ‘AUSPICIOUS NARADA said :—The Asuras vanquished 
tin battle by the..celestials surcharged with (tlie energy'df 


62 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


Krishna, sought shelter in Maya, the.supreme preceptor, of 
the conjurers. Creating three fortresses consisting of gold, 
silver, and iron respectively, that powerful being handed them 
over to the Asuras. 

All their egresses and ingresses were concealed from the 
sight of the enemies. No body could conceive the quantity 
of household necessaries contained inside these forts. O 
king! hidden inside and under the shelter of the forts, and 
keeping alive their former enmity, the leaders of the 
Asura hosts, began to destroy the three worlds. Thereupon 
the worlds with their guardian deities, approached the Lord 
(Siva) and bowing down unto him said:—‘O Lord! save 
us, thine own people from being destroyed by the Asuras 
residing in the three fortresses’. The Almighty Lord, out 
of kindness towards the celestials said unto them, ‘Be not 
afraid)’ Then placing on his bow-string an arrow inspired 
with religious aphorisms, he let it go directing it towards the 
forts. Out of that one arrow, issued forth other arrows having 
the blaze of fire like unto the innunierable rays emanting from 
the solar disc. In consequence.of being covered with these ar- 
rows, the heavenly orbs were lost to sight. Pierced with these 
‘arrows the garrison, deprived of life, began to drop down. The 
potent Maya versed in Yoga, fetching them, threw them in an 
well containing nectar. Soaked in the nectarian fluid, they 
came out with their limbs as hard as thunder-bolt,' and 
surcharged with great energy like unto the fice of lightning 
that cleaveth the clouds opes. Then seeing the. god whose 
emblem is the bull, thawarted in his resolutiog and absent- 
minded,the almighty Vishnu decided upon the following course 
of action. Then Brahma assumed the form of a calf and 
Vishnu himself, that of its dam. At noon they entered into the 
three frotresses and there drank off all the nectarian juice 
contained in the wells. Although the Asuras saw them in 
the act, being infatuated they did not prevent them. Seeing 

this and remembering the course of Destiny, that illustrious 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 63 


ascetic Hari, ever untouched by grief, smilingly said unto 
the afflicted protectors of the nectarian juice. ‘ Neither a 
deity, nor an-Asura, nor a man nor any other being, is 
capable of thwarting what has been fixed by fate revarding 
one’s own self or others or regarding both.’ Then by means 
of his own energy, piety, knowledge, prosperity, asce- 
ticism, learning, ceremonial observances, and his renuncia- 
tion, he created a chariot, a charioter, a banner, horses, a 
bow, an armour, arrows and other implements of battle for 
the use of Sambhu. Thereupon clad in the coat of mail and 
ascending the car Sambhu grasped the bow and the arrows. 
Then O king! during noontide, the Lord Hara placing 
arrows on his bow-string, in a moment burnt down the three 
impregnable forts with these shafts of his. Thereupon 
kettle-drums were sounded in the heavens swarming with 
hundreds of chariots. Divine sages, anscestral spirits, and 
lords of Siddhas, crying out ‘ Victory | victory unto thee’ 
poured showers: of blossoms on him. The Gandharvas, 
greatly delighted began to sing, and the Apsaras began to 
dance. O king! thus burning down these three forts, the 
Lord, the destroyer of the forts, repaired to his own residence 
praised by the deities headed by Brahma. Such is the work 
of Hari. He immitates thus, by his power of illusion, his 
human forms. The prowess of the preceptor of the worlds, 
that ‘exalted one, is sanctifying to the worlds and is sung by 
the sages. I have spoken all this to you,—what else should 
{ tell you next? , 


64 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


CHAPTER XI. 


, 


ibe AUSPICIOUS SUKA said:—Having heard an account. 
of the character,—that is alluded to with reverence in assem-, 
blies of the pious-of the Lord of the Daityas, that foremost, 
of illustrious beings whose hearts are engrossed in Krishna- 
king Yudhisthira became very much delighted ; and again 
questioned the son of the self-create divinity in the following: 
manner. : 

THE AUSPICIOUS YUDHISTHIRA said :—O potent sage 1 I, 
desire to hear from thee, an account of the eternal religion to- 
gether with the rites and ceremonies that ought to be observ- 
ed by the different sects in their different modes of existence ; 
for from (an audition of) it a persan attains to knowledge.’ 
Thou art the son of the highest divinity, the Lord of the. 
people (Brahma)..O Brahman {by means of thy concentration. 
asceticism and Yoga, thou hast secured in thy favor the, 
opinion of the other sons of Brahma. Those regenerate 
ones, who are kind-hearted, pious and peaceful like thyself. 
and who are devoted to Narayana, are acquainted with the 
highest and most mysterious forms of religion; but. others 
are not so. a2 ; 

Tue Auspicious NARADA said:—Saluting the unborn 
almighty One, the bridge of virtue of people, I shall :relate . 
the eternal religion, which I have heard from the lips of . 
Narayana. That Lord incarnating himself by his parts im 
Dakhyani is even now duly engaged in the performance 
of religious austerities for the welfare of the worlds, in the 
asylum of Vadarika. O king! the almighty lord Hari is 
‘identified with all the Vedas, and is the memory of those 
persons who are versed in them, and the proof of that 
religion in which the soul finds solace. Truthfulness, mercy, 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 65 


asceticism, purification, forgiveness, the power of discriminat- 
ing between propriety and impropriety, control over 
the mind, subjugation of the senses, harmlessness, 
the observation of Brahmacharyya, charity, muttering of 
inaudible prayers, simplicity, contentment, service of those 
with similar attitude unto all, total refrainment from vile 
deeds, inspection of the fruitless actions of men, silence, 
introspection, an equitable distribution of eatables and 
other things among beings, identification of other men with 
one’s own self and the act of looking upon them as divinities 
and O Pandavai an audition and recital of the name of 
Vishnu, remembrance of Him who is the refuge of the 
illustrious ones, service unto Him, His adoration, offering 
of salutations unto Him, servitude of Him, friendship to- 
wards Him, and dedication of one’s own self unto Him,— - 
these have been asserted to be the greatest of virtues, the 
common property of all human beings. O king! the religion 
that beareth all these thirty features can afford solace unto 
every soul. 

Those persons are called the regenerate ones with whom 
the purifactory rites ever remain in tact, and who have. 
been so denominated by the unborn divinity (Brahma). The 
celebration of sacrifices, study of the Vedas, charity, 
and performance of rites pertaining to their special mode of 
existence, are the duties of those twice-born ones who are 
pure by birth and behaviour. Or, reading and teaching, 
celebration of sacrifices on his own account andthe con- 
ducting of them, charity and acceptance of gifts from others 
these are the duties of a Vipra. Of these, teaching, the 
‘conducting of sacrifices and. acceptance of gifts, are the 
means of his livelihood. The means of livelihood of a Ksha- 
triya who protects his subjects, is by the realisation of 
taxes from them except the Vipras. The means of livelihood- 
“ofa Vaisya is cultivation and trading ; and his duty is sub- 
mission to the Brahmanas. The duty of a Sudra is his service 


9 


66 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


of the regenerate ones and his means of livelihood is by the 


same service of his master. Various occupation (cultivation, 


trade &c.), a modest acceptance-of uncalled for objects, act 
of begging corn every day, and of gleaning ears of corn from 
the fields, and farm yards,—these are the four means of main- 
tenance for the Brahmanas. Each of these means is worthier 
(of being resorted to),than the one preceding it. A man born 
in a lower order, should not, in the absence of danger, resort 
to a profession which is better than his own. But in times 
of danger, every one of every order except one belonging to 
the ruling order, may resort to any profession of any of the 
orders. A man may live either by Rita and Amrita, or by 
Mrita aad Pramita or by Satyamrita, but he should never 
live by Saruitht. By Rita is meant gleaning ears of corn 
from fields and market-places. Amrita means alms got 


without solicitation. d/rita means the act of begging. By 


‘Pramtta is meant cultivation, apd by Satyamrita, trading. 


Savritht means servitude unto a personof a Jower order. 
A vipra and one belonging to the ruling order should always 
shun the last-mentioned profession, as it is despised by all. 
Moreover a Vipra is unified with the Vedas, and one of the 
kingly order is identified with all the deities. Control over 


- the mind, subjugation of the senses, austete penance, puri- 


fication, contentment of heart, forgiveness, simplicity, know- 
ledge, kindness, fervid devotion towards the Deity that never 
lapseth and veracity—these are the characteristic features of 
the Brahmana. Valour, prowess, coolness, audacity, cha- 
rity, self-control, forgiveness, truthfulness, condescension 
and devotion to the Brahmanas—these are the characteris: 
tics of the Kshatriya class. The distinctive characteris- 


‘ties of the Vaisya, class are devotion towards the deities, pre- 


ceptors and the Being that never lapseth, the sustentation of 
Trivarga, religiousness, unceasing activity and skillfulness, 
The characteristic features of the Sudra sect are, humility, 
purity, unaffected devotion towards masters, observance of 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 67 


sacrifices unaccompanied by Vedic verses: absence of thie- 
vishness, truthfulness, and preservation of the kine and the 
Vipras, 

The duties of those women who consider [their hus- 
bands nothing less than divinities, are service unto their 
husbands, compliance with their (husbands’) wishes, a proper 
behaviour towards the friends of their husbands and an obser- 
vance of the vows undertaken by their husbands. A chaste 
lady, adorning her person with ornaments, should in proper 
season, please her husband by sweeping and plastering the 

“house, by decorating and incensing it, by keeping the house- 
hold furniture always clean, by obeying the diverse desires 
of her husband, by humility, self-control, and truthful and 
pleasing speeches, and by affection towards her lord. Ever 
satisfied, and free from all covetousness, skillful, versed in 
all duty, speaking true and pleasing words, always attentive, 
pure and amiable, she should adore her husband who is, not ! 
morally fallen. . That woman, who like the goddess of pros- 
petity’ single-mindedly adores her husband considering him 
to be none other than Hari, enjoys the company of her lord 
(after death) in the regions of Hari, even like the goddess — 
of prosperity enjoying the company of Hari himself. 

The means of livelihood for the mixed and other degraded 
and despicable orders that are free from sin and thievish ten- 
dencies, are the professions that have been followed in their 
respective families by their forefathers. O king! persons 
versed in the Vedas assert that the system of religion, which 
in harmony with the temparament of the men born therein, 
prevails in every Yuga, is the best source of all welfare, in 
this and in the next world, for men of that Yuga. A person, 
performing his duties and following the special profession 
of his order, gradually attains to the nature of the Supreme’ . 
Spirit and is set free from the bonds of actions. Just as a 
field that is continuously tilled looses all powers of fertility: 
and cannot yield corn, and destroys the seed sown in it, so 


68: _ SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


our heart the receptacle of all desires, becomes satiated by 
an over-indulgence in them. O king! fire may be extin- 
guished by a continuous pouring of clarified butter .on it, 
but it flashes forth when the same thing is poured in drops. 
I have described to thee, the characteristics of a person. 
emblematic of the order to which he belongs. But if thou 
seest one possessing characteristics different from those of his 
own order, then regard him as belonging to that order the 
characteristics of which he is seen to have. 


CHAPTER XII. 


a 


Te AUSPICIOUS NARADA continued:—A Brahmacharin 
should live in the family of his spiritual guide; he should 
have a thorough control over his'senses and should always 
perform what is beneficial to his preceptor. He should be 
as humble as a setvant and should entertain an unshaken 
affection for his preceptor. In the morning and in the eve- 
ning he should worship his preceptor, the fire (ze., the god 
of fire) the sun and others, foremost among the celestials. He 
should reiterate the name of the eternal Brahma and restrain 
his speech during hoth the twilights. Called upon by his spiri- 
tual guide to read the Vedas, he should go through them with 
perfect concentration of mind. In’ the beginning and at the 
end of his reading, he should salute his preceptor, by tou- 
ching his (preceptor’s) feet with his own head. He should wear 
the Mekhala (the triple girdle worn by the first three castes 
at the time of their investiture with the sacred thread), the 
skin of the black antelope, garments, braided locks, and the 
sacred thread, and bear in his hands, the sacred staff, and the 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 69 


Kam indalu, in accordance with the ‘rules prescribed in the 
Vedas. He should always carry the sacred grass (Kuga) in his 
hands. ‘In the morning and in the evening he should walk about 
begging. He should dedicate to his preceptor the things re- 
ceived as alms. He should with his preceptor’s permission 
eat them ; otherwise he.should suffer starvation. Possessing 
a good character, temperate in his diet, always active, of a 
respectful turn of mind, and self-controlled, he should have 
only that much of intercourse with women and with people 
enslaved by them, which is indispensably necessary. Every 
Brahmacharin, except those who have married and settled 
down, should always avoid the company of damsels, for 
rank passions are capable of stealing the reason even of 
an ascetic. A youthful Brahmachirin should never have the 
combing of his hair, the annointing, smearing and washing 
of his body, performed by the young wives of his 
preceptor. For verily women are like fire and men 
resemble pots containing clarified butter. In secluded 
places éven a father should shun the company of his own 
daughter. In other places he should remain with her so long 
as is necessary for the performance of some needful act. As 
long as the soul, considering the senses and the body to_ be 
hallucinations, cannot emancipate itself by a realisation ‘of its 
own self, the sense of duality in man is not put down. In 
consequence of this sense of duality arises the perversity of the 
soul, Oking! what I have described above is applicable not 
“only to a Brahmacharin, but also to an ascetic and an_ initi- 
ated house-holder. A house-holder, holding sexual inter- 
course with his wife after her period of menstruation, is 
of service unto his preceptor. People, binding themselves by 
the great vow of Brakmacharyya should not paint their eyes 
with collyrium, smear their head with unguents and have 
their bodies shampooed by others. They should avoid decorat- 
ing the walls of their rooms with pictures of women, taking 
any animal food or honéy, wearing garlands and using 


70 -SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


perfumes, ointments and ornaments. Thus having resided 
in the family of his preceptor, and there having studied the 
three Vedas with their branches, and‘ penetrated into their 
meanings according to his individual capability, and then 
having presented, if he is at all capable of.doing so, his 
preceptor with what is desired by him, and having received his 
(preceptor’s) permission, a regenerate one should enter into 
a family life, or repair to the forest (to lead the life of 
an anchorite, or take. to wandering, to lead the life of 
an itinerant beggar) or continue, to livegwith his spiritual 
guide (to lead the life of a perpetual religious student). 
He should always look upon’ the Lord Adhokshaja to- 
gether with the created beings that constitute his shelter, as 
permeating the Fires, his preceptor, and his soul, in the form 
of their respective regulator. Conducting himself in this 
way, a Brahmachérin, or an anchorite, or a sage, or a house- 
holder, fearned in the knowledge that is worthy of being 
mastered, attains after death to the state of the Supreme 
Brahma. os 


Now I shall recount to thee, the duties of an an- 
‘ chorite; these duties are prescribed by the sages and-by a 
due discharge of them, an anchorite may very soon secure 
for himself the posthumous state of the sages. He should 
not eat the product of cultivation, or any thing which though 
not the product of cultivation is prematurely ripened or any 
thing that is concocted with fire. But.he should eat only 
what is ripened with the rays of the sun. In proper time of 
the day, he should prepare the Charu and cakes, with wild corn, 
When he would procure fresh eatables he should leave aside 
the stale ones. Only to preserve the sacred fires he should’ 
take shelter in a shouse, ora cottage or in the caverns of 
a mountain; otherwise he should bear up against (nocturnal) 
cold, wind, fire, the rains, and the .rays of the sun. He 
should preserve the hair of his head as well as those growing 
on his body, and also his nails, and his beards; he should 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 71 


not clean the dirt on his skin. He should wear knotted 
locks, and carry about him, the Kamandalu, the skin of the 
black antelope, the sacred staff, barks of trees, his 
garments and the fires. The anchorite should roam in the 
forests, performing rigid austerities, twelve years or eight 
years, or four years, or two years, or at least one year. 
But he should be careful, so that his understanding may 
not become perverted with the severity of the mortifications. 
When on account the decrepitude or disease he would 
be unable to discharge his duties, or to exert himself in the 
pursuit of. knowledge, then he should put an end to his life 
by starvation. Then placing the fires on himself, and dis- 
pensing with the false notions indexed .by such terms 
as 1” “Mine’’ &c., he should completely discompose 
his body into its constituent ingredients. That intelligent 
being should assign according to their respective origins the 
pores of his body to the sky, his breath to the wind, his vital 
warmth to fire, his semen, blood and rheum to water, and his 
remaining bones and flesh to earth. He should then consign 
his speech and his organ of speech, to Fire, his hands and 
handicraft to Indra, his feet and his power of locomotion, to 
Vishnu, his generative organ and his potency to the Lord 
of people, his anus and his excrescence to Death, his auditory 
organ and his audition of sounds to the cardinal quarters, 
and his tactual organ and his tactility to the Wind. He 
should, O king} delegate his visual organ and the objects 
of visual perception to the solar orb, his palate and his 
secretions to water, and his olfactory organ and _ his: power 
of perceiving smell, to the earth; he should make over his 
mind and his desires to the moon, his understanding and 
the objects of the understanding to the Supreme Brahma; 
he should resign ‘his self-consciousness and his action to 
Rudra, for through the instrumentality of this Rudra the 
sense of distinction indexed by such terms as “I” “ mine” &c 
is infused into,map. He should merge his heart and his con- 


. 


q2 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


sciousness in his soul and his mutable soul and the principles 
(goodness, dullness and energy) in} the immutable Brahma. 
Thea he should dissolve earth into water, water into heat, 
heat into the air, the air into the sky, the sky into the incom- 
‘prehensible agency that conceives individuality, this (agency) 
into the primary principle, the primary principle into 
the nascent elements, and these into the Supreme soul. 
‘Then realising the soul as imperishable and as a flash of 
consciousness, and discarding the sense of duality, he should 
repose, like unto the fire that has burnt down the cinders. 


CHAPTER XIII. 


\ 

T HE AUSPICIOUS NARADA went on :—A person capable 
of exerting himself in the persuit of knowledge should have 
recourse to the life of a mendicant. He should in that 
mode of existence retain his body only. If ever he would 
enter a village, he should stay there only one night. Ordi- 
narily he should wander over this earth totally indifferent 
to its-attachments. If he would ever wear cloth, it should 
be barely sufficient to cover his pudenda. In the absence 
of danger he should not resume things which he had once 
abandoned, except the sacred staff and other such emblems. 
Alone, he should wander as a mendicant. No where should 
he seek shelter. He should be always delighted im his own 
self. He should be peaceful and- the friend of every being 
and he should consider Narayana as his best refuge. He 
should descry this universe in the undeteriorating Self which 
jg other than causes and their consequences ; and:he should 
perceive also the Self, the Supreme Brahma, every where 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 73 


in this universe of causes and consequences. During the 
mediate state belween. slumber and wakefulness, looking 
into the soul and realising its true nature, he should: con-— 
sider the bondage (in this world) and the emancipation (from 
it) as mere delusions and not reality. He should exult 
neither in the surety of the destruction of this body nor in 
the shortness of its duration. He_should wait for the 


Supreme Kala the producer as well. as the destroyer of 


created beings. He should not devote himself to improper 


studies, and he should not try to ascertain his term of life 
with the help of astronomy and other such sciences. He 
should avoid debatable arguments and should not adhere 
to any party with solicitude. He should not compel any- 
body to become his pupil, or get by heart many books. He 
should not make the exposition of the scriptures his profes- 
sion, or should not bégin the erection of any monastery. 
Generally an observance of the prescribed duties of his 
order by an ascetic, does not go to secure religious merit 
for him; for he is high-souled, and self-subdued, and of 
an impartial disposition. When he will realise the best 
knowledge, he may continue the discharge of his duties 
or he may avoid their observance. He should keep the 
signs of his greatness hidden, and he should manifest them 
only when it would be necessary to serve bis inevitable needs. 
Though biessed with the best of understandings, he should 
show himself as an insane boy ; and though very intelligent 
he should behave as an idiot. He should act in compli- 
ance with the whims of the people around him. I shall 
relate to thee an ancient history illustrating this subject, 
in which is described the dialogue between Prahlada and 
asage engaged in the performance of the vow A jeara. 
Once upotiatime, when wandering over the worlds, sur- 
rounded by several of his ministers, with the intention of 
acquainting himself with the knowledge of human kind. 
Prahlada, the beloved of the Great One, saw a sage lying 


190 


74 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


on the surface of the earth, on the ridge of the Vindhya hills 
near the banks of the river Kaveri. The pure effulgence 
of the. body and limbs of this sage was screened 
by a coating of dust that had settled on his person. 
By his deeds, his appearance, bis words and the emblems 
indicative of his order and mode of existence, none could 
recognise him, whether he was the self-same sage or not. 
The great devotee of the Almighty Lord at once recognised 
him; and saluting and duly adoring him, and touching his 
(sage’s) feet with his head, and desirous of knowing -the 
truth, he (Prahlada) said: ‘Thou dost carry a stout body 
like unto that of one performing physical exercise and enjoy- 
ing the luxuries of life. The assiduous can amass wealth, 
the wealthy are bent on-enjoyments; the bodies of 
people devoted to enjoyments become corpulent. This 
is the universal rule. But thou liest quite supine, and, 
O Brahmana| it is sure that thou possessest no riches, the 
source of all enjoyments; so thou dost indulge in no 
luxuries ; whence then is the corpulence of thy body? Do 
thou relate unto us the cause, if there is nothing improper 
in it for us to know. Thou art learned, accomplished, and 
clever, and a pleasing and versatile conversationist and 
art equally disposed to every thing. Seeing other beings 
exert themselves for actions, thou liest inert and effortless.’ 

THE AUSPICIOUS NARADA continued :—~Thus, questioned 
by the lord of the Daityas, and enslaved by his nectar-like 
speech, the illustrious sage struck with wonder replied 
saying i— 

THE AUPICIOUS BRAHMANA said:—O foremost of the 
Asuras ! thou art favoured by the illustrious personages ; thou 
knowest by thy spiritual insight the consequences of the attach- 
ment to, and renouncement of, worldly objects. What is there 
unkrown to that one, on account of whose fervid devotion 
there dwelleth in his-heart the Almighty Lord Narayana dis- 

elling his ignorance like unto the sun dispelling darkness? 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 78 


Still, O king ! [I shall answer thy questions as best as I can; 
for, he who wants to purify himself should think it his 
duty to hold conversation with thyself. Goaded to the 
perfornrance of actions by that desire which remains un- 
satiated ‘even by the enjoyment of proper objects and 
which is repeatedly throwing us in.this current of world- 
ly existence, I was compelled to be born in various exis- 
tences. Wandering at random, in consequence of my 
deeds, through various existences, I!am born in this one, 
which may be turned (by our own exertions) either intoa 
means for the attainment of Heaven and emancipation, or for 
the degradation into a lower state of existence, or for the re- 
generation in the present one. -But even in this existence, 
seeing the frustration of the aims of a husband and wife per- 
forming actions for securing weal ‘and banishing woe, I 
have betaken myself to the way leading to the discontinuance 
of worldly acts. Self-realisation is the highest felicity possi- 
ble to man. This is Hrought about by a discontinuance of 
all worldly acts. Considering enjoyments to be fanciful 
creations _of the mind, I am lying inactive. I enjoy only 
what is ordained by Fate for my enjoyment, Thus people— 
though {ree from a sense of _ gh free from a sense of duality—ignoring the means of 
their felicity that may be discovered in. themselves, come by 
this dreary human existence replete with vicissitudes. ~The 
condition of a person seeking felicity in other quarters than his 
own self, resembles that of an ignorant being who, leaving 
aside water covered with acquatic herbs and mosses, runs for 
the purpose of getting it after a mirage, When a person 
forsaken by Destiny tries through the instrumentality of 
“his body dependent on the same agency, to secure his happi- 
ness and to put away his misery, the deeds he performed in 
a previous existence prove abortive. Of what avail will 
hard-earned wealth and desirable objects be to that person 
who can not free himself from the three kinds of misery, 
in consequence of which his days become shortened » I see 


76 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


the troubles of the rich who are covetuous and of unsubdued 
self. They can not enjoy sleep through fear; they are afraid 
of every body about them. .A_ person possessed of 
life and riches always lives in fear of his sovereign, of a 
pilferer, of his enemies and relations, of birds and beasts, of 
his priest, of Time, and (lastly) of his own self. Therefore 
an intelligent person should renounce all desire for life and 
riches knowing these to be the causes of affliction, infatuation, 
fear, anger, attachment, unmanliness and troubles. In this 
world the bee and a huge serpent have become our’ principle 
preceptors. Meditating on their example we have learnt to 
be content and indifferent to worldly objects. Ihave been 
taught to renounce worldly, objects by the bee. For, the 
enemies of a wealthy man after slaying him, rob him of his 
hard-earned wealth, even as men deprive the bees of their 
hard-collected honey. Free from all desires I am satisfied 
with what comes to me without my exerting for it. If no- 
thing comes, I lie inactive like a huge and powerful serpent 
for many a day. Sometimes I live upon a small quantity of 
food, sometimes I eat much. Sometimes I take palatable 
food and sometimes distasteful dinner. Sometimes I indulge 
in rich and dainty dishes and sometimes 1 eat poor and 
stale food. Sometimes people out of ,reverence provide 
edibles for me, sometimes they disrespectfully, give meagre 
fare to me; sometimes I do justice to food even though 
J may have eaten once before. Sometimes during the 
day or at night I procure a small quantity of food. Some- 
times I wear linen cloth, sometimes I robe myself in silk 
stuffs; sometimes I cover myself with antelope skins or 


with rags or with the bark of, trees. Sometimes I cover my-" 


self with whatever [ get. Thus of a contented heart, I use 
those things which I am destined to use or enjoy. Sometimes 
I lie on the bare earth or on leaves or grass or stones or ashes. 
Sometimes in compliance with the wishes of others J sleep 
inside a mansion on a (downy) bed stretched upon a (costly) 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 17 


bed-stead. Sometimes bathed, annointed, clad in fine gar- 
ments and wearing garlands and ornaments, I ride on chariots, 
elephants or horses. Sonretitnes again, O lord! T wander stark 
naked like unto an imp. Neither dol revile nor eulogise per- 
sons naturatly perverse. I do pray for their welfare as well as 
for an unification of myself with the high-soueld Vishnu. 
Burn indecision as an offering on the fire of thy mental 
faculties that are. imbued with. a sense of distinction, and 
these latter on the fire of thy mind blinded with-the delusion 
"of wealth. Offer thy mind as an oblation te egeism and 
then buen egoism as an offering on the (fire of the) Energy of 
illusion, Then becoming truth-seeing and sagacious victi- 
mise this Energy of illusion to self-com munion. Then 
liberated from the influence of passions, thou shalt repose 
engrossed in self-co mmunion, and realising -thy own self. 
Thus I have explained” fo thee, the ever-mysterious process 
of selferevelation. This process is thought to be distinct 
. from the teachings of the Shastras, and is seldem practised on 
the face’ of the world. Still I have described it to thee for 
thou art greatly devoted to the Great One. 

Tue AUSPICIOUS NARADA went on:—Thus the lord of 
the Asuras, hearing from the lips ef the sage, an account of 
the. duties of an ascetic of the highest order, was greatly 
obliged; then adoring the sage and with his permissioi) repair- 
ed to his ewn residence. 


s 


09—— 


E€HAPTER XIV. 


Tie AUSPICLOUS YuDuISTHIRA said :—O divine sage! 
relate to me, the mode of life by which a house-holdec, 


78 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


having his heart, like mine, fondly attached to his habitation, 
may without delay vindicate his denomination ? 

THE AusPicious NARADA said:—O monarch! a person 
dwelling in a house should perform acts suitable (to his 
mode of life) and then resigning them to Vasudeva, should 
worship ‘the illustrious sages. In proper seasons, with due 
attention and regard, he should hear the nectar-like accounts 
of the incarnation of the Great one. He should always 
keep company with persons of a peaceful and dispassionate 
nature. “Then in consequence of his association with 
them, his affection towards his own self, his children 
and his wife, would wear away; and he would re- 
nounce them even as one renounces the objects of his 
dream when he is awake. A wise man should enjoy his 
habitation and body as much as is merely necessary. 
Though disaffected at heart to them, he should behave like 
one attached to them; and among men, he should make 
a display of his manliness. Entertaining no affection for 
them he should acquiesce in what his kinsmen, his parents, 
his sons, his brothers, his friends and others might say or 
wish. A prudent person should perform the aforesaid acts, 
preserving his wealth, which he might have-.obtained by 
selling corn &c, by minning, by accident, and by favor of 
fortune. Corporeal beings can lay claim only toas much 
wealth as is enough to fill their belly (¢ ¢.to keep their 
body and soul together). Those who boast are surely 
‘pilferers and deserve chastisement. A house-holder 
should look upon deer, camels, donkeys, monkeys, mice, 
serpents, birds, and bees as his own sons; for between sons 
and these, there is very little difference. Attaining to 
Trivarga with difficulty, he should not constantly enjoy it. 
He should enjoy what he would come by accident and what 
would be suitable to season and place. He should equitably 
divide the objects. of enjoyment among dogs, (morally) 
fallen’ people, and Chanddlas. Even his. wife whom he 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 9 
ardently claims as his own, he should employ in the service 
of his guests. By the person who can forego his claim on 
his wife—a wife for whom men can forsake their lives, can 
slay their preceptors and parents,—is conquered the un- 
conquerable Divinity. How wide is the chasm between this 5 
worthless body that will be reduced to worms, filth or ashes, 
and a wife to whom we are attached for its (bodj’s) benefit ? 
At what a great distance lieth the soul, that can veil 
yon firmament over with its glory! By performing sacrifices 
with his wealth obtained by accident, he should turn the 
leavings of them to his sustenance. Then wisely renouncing 
his claim on every thing, ‘he should follow in the footsteps 
of those sages who have betaken themselves to the way 
leading to beatitude. He should worship the celestials, the 
sages, the mortals, the spectres, the ancestral spirits and 
the soul, with the wealth accruing from his profession. He 
should separately worship the Purusha. When he would 
acquire a control over himself and other prosperities begot 
of sacrificial ‘performances, he should celebrate sacrifices 
by burning offerings on the fire (Aguthotra) according to 
the Baztanic mode of sacrifice. O king! the almighty Lord, 
the eater of all sacrificial oblations, is not so much 
satisfied with an oblation offered to Him on fire, as with 
one offered to him through the vipras. Therefore, bestow- 
ing their objects of desire on Brahmanas, celestials and 
mortals, he (house-holder) should duly worship the soul 
acquainted with the nature of this body. He should also 
worship it in the person of other men except the Brahmanas. 
A wealthy regenerate one should, in proportion to his riches, 
perform Syédhas of his parents and their kinsmen, in 
the latter half of the month of Skdédr@ (a lunar month 
corresponding to August—September), in the periods when 
the sun reaches the solstitial and the equinoctial points, 
on the advent of a portentuous calamity, on the day on 
which a Z:thz begins and ends without one sunrising or 


80 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


between two sunrises, during the periods of the solar and 
lunar eclipses, on the twelveth lunar day of a month, during’, 
the ascendency the asterisk Sravané, on the third day of the ° 
bright half of the month in which the constellation Visakhé 
is on the ascendant, ‘on the ninth day of the bright half of the 
month of the asterisk Avrctizkd, on the four Ashkiakds of the 
four autumnal and winter months, on the seventh day of the 
bright halfofthe month of Afdgha, on the day of the full 
moon when the asterisk Maghd is on the ascendant, during 
the periods when an asterisk after which a month has been 
named, rides ascendant on the day of the full-moon in its 
month or on the fifteenth day of the same month when the 
moon rises one digit less (than the full), on the twelveth 
lunar day when the asterisk Anurddhd or Sravand or Uttara- 
Sfélgunt or Uttardsdré or Uttarabhaddrapadha rides ascendant, 
on the eleventh lunar day when the constellations U¢tar- 
éséré rides in conjuction, during the ascendency of asterisk 
that rode ascendant during the births of the deceased people, 
and on the day of the lucky conjunction of the asterisk 
Sravand. These are the periods during which men can* 
attain to prosperity, these seasons add tothe welfare of 
people. During these, men should, with siugleness of pur- 
pose, strive after the attaiment of prosperity ; these enhance 
the duration of their life. The merit accruing from the 
performance of ablutions, muttering of prayers, burning of 
offerings on the fire, observance of vows, and adoration of 
deities and regenerate ones, as also what is offered to an- 
. cesteal spirits, men and spectres, during these periods, are 
said to be ever-enduring. O king! Srédhas should be per- 
formed at the observance of purifactory rites for the benefit 
of one’s wife, children, and own self, as also at.‘the time of 
the cremation of a corpse, on the death-day of a person, and 
at the observance of other ceremonies granting prosperity. 
Next I shall describe to thee, the places where’ righteous- 
ness and other prosperities are to be found. That is the holiest 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM: 81 


of all countries where is to be found a yictuous person, the 
’ counterpart of the Great One, in whom is present this 
mobile and immobile universe. That country is the recep- 
tacle of all prosperity, where resideth the race of Brah- 
manas engaged'in rigid penances, and gifted with benevo- 
lence and learning, and where the adoration of Hari is 
constantly carri€d on. Those regions are most sanctified 
where the Ganges and other rivers mentioned in the Puranas 
flow, where there are Pushkara and other lakes, fields in- 
habited by the pious, the Zyrthas Kurukshetra, the Prayaga 
which is the head of the Asura Gya, the hermitage of the 
sage Pulaha, the Naimisha forest, the river Falgu, the bridge 
constructed by Rama, the Pravasa Tirtha, the Kugasthali, 
the Varanashi, the Madhupuri, the lakes Pampa and Vindhu 
the asylum of Vadarika, the stream Nanda, and the hermit- 
ages of Sita and Rama, as also O king! the Mahendra, the 
Malaya and other Kudéchalas, and lastly where the idol 
.of Hari is situated. A person desirous of securing pros- 
perity should always worship at these places; for when he 
performs a righteous act at one of these places, the merit 
of it is increased thousandfold. O lord of earth! by 
the wise, the best judge of pious persons, Hari only hath 
been described as a worthy being, for by Him is pervaded 
this mobile and immobile universe. O king! during the 
celebration of thy Rajshuya sacrifice in the very presence 
of the divine sages, the sons of Brahma, and other pious 
people, Achutya was chosen as the one worthy of receiving 
adoration at the first instance. By an adoration of the Being 
that never lapseth, all beings as well as one’s own self are 
satisfied, for He is the root of the mighty tree consisting 
of this mundane shell thronged with numerous created 
beings. This Lord hath created the structures of sages, 
celestials men and other lower animals; He is enshrined 
within these structures, in the form of their soul, being 
known under the style of the Purusha. O monarch as the 
if 


- 82 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


Great One is present in thesé structures in a comparative 
scale, therefore a man is worthier than other lower animals. 
Among men, those are more deserving, whose souls aré 
more enlightenéd. O king! when people’s understanding 
Was bent on showing disrespect towards one another, the 
Wise sages in the silver age introduced the adoration of 
the idols of Hari. That time forward, some persons worship 
Hart in His idols with regardful offerings. But when wor- 
shipped by men envious of others, these idols do not fulfill 
their desires. O foremost of kings! know that among men 
& Brahmana is the worthiest person, for by virtue of his 
austerities, his learning, and his indifference to things not 
possessed by him, he upholds the Vedas which are ideatified 
With the form of Hari. O monarch! even these Brahmahas 
are considered as deities (worthy of His Veneration) by 
Krishna, the Soul of the universe, who purifies the three 
worlds by a sprinkling of the dust. from the feet of these 
Brahmanas. 


CHAPTER XY. : 


r 

La “AUSPICIOUS NARADA continued :—O king! some, 
among the regenerate ones, are devoted to the perfomance 
of the acts prescribed for their mode of life, some again to 
‘the observance of austerities, some to the study of the Vedas, 
‘some to the exposition of them, and some to the attainment 
of knowledge and success in Yoga. A person, desirous ‘of 
‘eternally securing the merit arising from his charitable acts, 
should bestow the oblations of food, intended for the manes 
of his ancestots and for the gods, 6n a Braliwiana ‘occupidd 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. | $3 


in the pursuit of knowledge. In the absence of such a one 
"he should make others the recipients of his charity, according 
to their worthiness. On the occasion of the offering of 
oblations ‘to’ the gods, a person should feed two Brahmanas. 
On the occasion of the offering of oblations to the ancestral 
manes he should feed three Brahmanas. Or during both these 
ceremonies, he should severally feed one Brahmana only. 
Even if he be very wealthy he should not celebrate these 
ceremonies in a grand style. For if he gives a sumptuous 
feast tovhis relatives and in this way makes the Sradha 
ceremony an extensive one, then he would not be able to 
show reverence suitable to the occasion and place, to 
procure proper articles necessary for the oblations, to 
select a worthy “recipient of them, and to perform the 
adoration duly, Frugal fare, suitable for a sage,—after 
having in the first instance been dedicated to Hari,—duly 
and reverentially offered to a worthy recipient in proper 
season and of place, is capable of fullilling the desires of the 
offerer and assigning eternal merit unto him. Equally 
distributing the edibles among the deities, sages, the ances- 
tral manes, created beings, himself and his kinsmen, he 
should look upon them as identical with the Purusha. In 
a Sradha ceremony animal food should not be offered; and 
aman conversant with the essence of righteousness should 
not eat it. For an adequate satisfaction is obtained by 
eating a frugal meal (consisting of wild rice) suitable for a 
sage ; but so much is not obtained by taking animal food pro- 
cured by animal-slaughters There is not a more exalted form 
of righteousness fur men desirous of embracing a perfect 
religion, than the avoidance of doing harmful acts towards 
beings, by mind, body or speech. herefore wise people, 
indifferent to worldly attachment and well-versed in the sacri- 
ficial lore, burn their acts as offerings on the fire of self- 
control kindled by the lamp of knowledge. Beings are 
terrified at the sight of a person worshipping by the sacrifice 


“$4 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


of beings. For this one is greatly cruel and is sure to slay 
them (beings), as he is unacquainted with the essential 
nature of the soul, and’ is bent on satiating the thirst of 
his heart. Therefore a righteous person, ever-satisfied with 
himself, should perform his every day as well as occasional 
rites, with wild rice obtained by accident. A pious person 
should steer clear of the following five branches of impiety 
namely, Vidharma, Paradharma, Upadharma, Dharmdvdsa 
and Dharmachala; for these ought to -be considered 
equally interdicted as impiety itself. Anything that goes 
against one’s own religion is styled Vidharma. Paradharma 
is the system of religion inculcated by others. Heresy or 
religious hypocrisy is termed Upadharma. Anything bear- 
ing only the name of religion is called Chaladharma, 
(sophism is referred to). What men perform according to 
their individual sense of religion is known as Dharmdvdsa, : 
for that is different from the prescribed duties of their 
respectives mode of existence. What religion in whicha 
man is born can not afford solace to him?’ An indigent 
person should not exert himself to get money for the pur- 
pose of performing meritorious acts or for sustamning his life. 
The very want of activity of a person that lies inert like 
a huge serpent, becomes his means of livelihood. Where 
can a person—who is running in every direction allured by his 
objects of desire,and thirsting for gain,—find that felicity which 
is enjoyed by a self-contented being cherishing no desire 
and finding solace in his own soul? For a person of satisfied 
heart the heavenly quarters are fraught with every blessing, 
even asthorns and gravel are turned to account by one 
wearing shoes. O monarch! a self-satisfied person can live 
drinking water only ; but others on the contrary, behave like 
dogs, for they are enslaved by the pleasures pertaining to 
the palate and the generative organ. The energy, learning, 
asceticism, and fame of A Vipra of a dissatisfied nature, melt 
away on account of the ranknese of his passions, as also his 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 85 


knowledge is dissipated. By drinking and eating his fill a 
person can reach the end of his appetite; so by indulging 
in his rage he can reach its end. But be cannot reach the 
end of his covetuousness, even by conquering and enjoying 
the cardinal quarters and the worlds. O king! many an ex- 
perienced sage, capable of dispelling the doubts of others and 
many a person worthy of presiding in an assembly, fall into 
(the depths of) degradation, on account of their dissatisfac- 
tion. A man should conquer desire by foregoing all worthy 
expectations, anger by a renouncement of desire, cupidity 
by beholding good good objects i in evil light, fear by a_ belief, in 
Fatalism, sorrow and fondness by his metaphysics, pride by 
a service of the illustrious beings, the impediments in the 
performane of Yoga by taciturnity, anc and envy by abandoning 
all exertions for_the attainment _o of objects of desire. He 
‘should overcome misery caused u unto him by other beings 
by showing mercy unto the _malefactors, as also miseries 
caused by Destiny and his own self, by self-communion and 
Yoga prowe ess respectively. He should conquer sleep by 
serving the Principle af goodness, the Principles of Energy 
and Dullness through the instrumentality of the Principle of 
Goodness, and this latter by quiescence. A person can 
speedily conquer all these by devetion to his preceptor. 
Like unto the ablution performed by an elephant all his 
audition of the Shdstras by a person goes for nothing who 
perversely considers his preceptor, the image of the Great 

One, the lighter of the lamp of knowledge within him—as 

mortal. A preceptor is identities L with the Almighty One. He is 

the lord of the Pradhana and Purusha ; the foot of a preceptor 

is sought after by people well-versed in the Yoga. But even 

such a preceptor is considered as mortal by men! All reli- 

gious .and moral ordinances aim at the realisation of this 

one end, namely, the subjugation of the passions. But if a 

man securing success in this direction fails in the practice of 

Yoga, then all his labour is considered to be fruitless. Just 


86 SRIMADBHAGABATAM, 


as the products of cultivation cannot bring about the fruit of 
‘Yoga (Emancipation) so with respect to a person having a 
mind engrossed by the outside world, his deeds /shtha and 
Purtha* instead of being beneficial unto him, become the 
causes of his entanglement in this world. A person endea- 
vouring to conquer his heart should keep coimpany with 
none and should forsake his abode. Becoming a_ mendicant 
and living alone in a solitary place, he should maintain 
his life by moderately eating what is obtained by begging. O 
king ! constructing his seat on a level and clean piece of land, 
he should sit upon it comfortably, quietly and uniformly, and 
with his body straight, and he should utter “Om.” By practis- 
ing Puraka, Kumvaka, and Rechaka, he should restrain his 
vital breaths called Prdéxa and Apénud. He should give up 
all desires by looking to the ‘tip of his nose so long as his 
mind remains uasubdued. Retrieving his ever-roving mind 
that travels every where goaded by desire, a prudent person 
should gradually confine it within his heart. Practising 
these things the heart of an ascetic, within a short while 


" altains to quiescence, even like a piece of fire-wood when the 


fire burning it is extinguished. The mind that is not agitated 
by desire and other passions and the faculties of which are 
all pacified, is never again distracted, for it has been touched 
by the ecstacy of Brahma-realisation. If a mendicant, alter 
having wandered away abandoning the house-holder’s mode 
of existence, in which there is room for the cultivation of 
Trivarga, reassumes the same mode of life, then he is surely 
very shameless and is like one that swallows up what he 
vomits forth. Some -people there are, who at first’ consider 
the body destructible and distinct from the soul, and com: 
pare it with filth, worms or ashes, ,But these men again 
boast of it thinking it to be ever-enduring, Surely they are 


* ‘Purtha means an act of pious liberality, being defined as the offering 
wef tanks, wells, lakes &c as presents. /shktka is defind as the observance of 
asceticism, truthfulness, hospitality &c, 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM, 87 


great fools. The avoidance of action by a house-holder, 
non-observance of vows by a Brahmachiarin, residence of an 
ascetic in a country and rank growth of passions in a mendi- 
cant, are mockeries of the duties of their respective order of 
existence. Certainly these people are the vilest among all 
the men of their orders. They are befooled by the illusive 
energy of the Lord and should be overlooked out of kind- 
ness. With what ulterior aim and for whom should he main- 
tain his body giving the reins to his passions, who has come 
to know the nature of the Supreme Brahma and whose de- 
sires are smothered by his knowldge ? This body has been 
compared to a chariot, the sense-organs to the steeds (of this 
chariot), the mind, the ruler of senses, to the reins, the objects 
of preception to the path {on which this chariot is to roll), 
the understanding to the charioteer, and the heart to the cor- 
dages of this chariot (body). Indeed these cordages (worldly 
bonds) are made by the Lord himself. The ten vital breaths 
have been compared to the axle of this chariot, piety and im- 
piety to the wheels, and the self-conscious soul to the warrior 
‘enshrined within this chariot. The bow of this warrior is 
Pranava (the mystic syllable om”), his arrows are indenti- 
fied with the emancipated soul, and his target is the Supreme 
Divinity. Attachment, malice, cupidity, sorrow, fondness, 
fear, pride, haughtiness, disrespectfulness, calumny, delusion, 
harmfulness, anger, fearful ignorance, susceptibility to error, 
sleep. and hunger—these and such other things are his 
foes. His foes (the aforesaid ones, are sometimes boro 
out of the Principles of Energy and Dullness and some- 
times ont of the Principle of Goodness. So long as he 
would ‘sit inside this chatiot of human body, bringing 
under his thorough control its outfits consisting of tle sense 
organs, he should weild his swerd of knowledge whetted. 
iby serving the feet of the illustrious ones. Then seeking re- 
fuge in the Being that never lapseth, destroying his.exemies, 
enraptured, contented and pacified, he should {forsake i 


8$ SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


(body or chariot). Otherwise (if he does not seck refuge. 
in Hari) the horses consisting of his senses inclined to out- 
ward world, and the charioteer, betaking to a wrong path 
{the path of desires) will land this heedless person among a 
band of robbers identical with the objects of sensual enjoy- 
ment. These robbers will then hurl him with his horses 
and chatioteer in the hole of this world, in which there is 
_every danger of life and which is pervaded with a blinding 
gloom. . 

Two different kinds of acts have been innumerated in the 
Vedas, namely acts having the advancement of worldly inter- 
ests for their object, and acts having no ulterior object in view. 
By a performance of the former class of acts, men are repeat- 
edly born, wheréas by a performance of the latter, they drink 
the nectar of emancipation. The sacrifice called Wensra— 
which is performed for the fruition of our desires and in which 
various articles are offered(to the gods),—as also the Sacrifices 
termed Agnihottra, Darsa, Purnamdsa, Chaturmdsyam, and 
Suta and those in which beasts are victimised and others, are 
the outcomes of desire and so cannot afford solace. The 
classes of acts called Yutam and Prahutam are the results 
of desire and are said to be favourite acts. These are included 
in the genus of acts having worldly advancement for their 
object. The act of erecting temples, and places where 
water is distributed, and excavation of wells, and construc- 
tion of pleasure-gardens, are called Purta. O Lord of the 
earth ! a person betaking himself to the way leading to the 
contenuance of worldly acts, is again born in this world by 
the following process. The subtle molecules of the sacrifi- 
cial oblations offered by him in this life, become the material 
for the construction of the body he will assume in his next 
existence. After the death of a person, his spiritual 
body is conveyed to the regions of the moon, being possessed 
by the gods presiding over haze, night, and the dark half 
of a month, as also by the deity that holds sway during the 


_ SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 89 


winter solstice. At the destruction of this subtle body with 
which he experiences there, happiness or misery according 
to his good or evil doings, his spirit disappears for a timé. 
Then again dropping (from the skies) in the form of rains, 
it (his spirit) is grown as Oshad? and Birudha ; these last- 
mentioned are eaten by men and are then converted into 
semen (from which human bodies are developed). This. pro- 
cess of transmigration is called Pitriyéna. Passing in due 
order through all these different stages, at last it (spirit) is 
born on earth. Here he is called a regenerate one, as he is 
purged of all impiety by the purifactory rites commencing 
with Nisheka and ending in the funeral ones. A person 
betaking to the way leading to the discontinuance of worldly 
acts, at the first instance, burns his acts and sacrificial 
performances as offering on the fire consisting of his senses 
enlightened by the lamp of knowledge. Then he offers his 
senses as offerings to his mind performing the acts of ‘seeing 
&c., his ever-changing mind to his speech, and his speech to 
the syllable “Om” consisting of three mystic vowels. He then 
dedicates this syllable “ Om” to a Point, the Point to sound, 
sound to the Vital Principle, and this last-mentioned one to 
Mahat. He is then conveyed to the gods presiding over 
fire, sun, day, as also to those who hold sway during the 
break aud close of a day, during the bright half of a month, 
“and on the day of the full moon, and to Brahm, one after 
another. After this, he is converted into a gross object of 
this earth, then to a subtle thing, then again to a causal 
frame. Then being -present in this latter form in every~ 
thing, he is turned into the soul in the fourth state of its 
existence (Zurya). This- process of attaining Emancipa- 
tion has been called Devajéna. Passing through al! 
stages of this process, a self-communing person engross~ 
ed in introspectign, and of pacified soul, attains to the 
regions of Brahm& and is not bora again. Whoever 
(t. e., whatsoever soul) perceives, with his eyes consisting 
Iz 


90 F SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


of his knowledge of the Skdstras, these two modes, 
namely Pitrijéna and Devjéna described in the Vedas, is 
never overcome by infatuation though he be encumbered 
with a body. The real entity which exists in the nascent 
condition of this body as its cause, and which abides after 
its destruction, comprises the enjoyment of the outside 
world as well as its enjoyer, all created beings of superior 
and inferior order, and the connotation as well as the 
denotation of terms, This entity is identified with’ the 
organs of perception as wells with the objects of percep- 
tion; it is delusion as well knowledge. Just as, against all 
reason and. common sense, reality.is ascribed (by boys) 
to-a reflected image having no actual ‘existence so this 
body consisting of the senses is fancied to be real ; for it is 
difficult to actualise the real entity, The body, a fanciful 
shadow of ‘the five ingridients of earth ete., cannot be 
said either to bea result of the combination of these in- 
gridients or any thing evolved out of them, It is neither 
canal alienated from them nor associated with them; but 
itisa hallucination, These ingridients being compounds, 
must have been composed of other subtler elements, Even 
these latter are unreal, not to speak of the former ones, 
So long as delusion holds sway over the mind the error of 
falsely identifying one thing as another continues; During. 
this season, the prescriptive and the prohibitory precepts 
of the Shdstvas, may hold good, even as the experiencing 
of sleep and wake is possible during a dream. A_ thought. 
ful sage by reflecting on the unity found among thoughts 
actions and things, and by perceiving the real nature of the 
soul, puts off the three states of slumber, “wake, and dream. 
By unity of thought is meant the recognition of no differ- 
ence between causes and consequences like unto -thinking 
the threads of acloth the same as the clath itself, ‘This 
is possible as duality has no actual existence. O ruler of 
the earth. the resignation of acts performed through tlie 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. gt 


instrumentality of speech, the mind and the body, to the 
Supreme Brahma_himself, is called the unity of actions. 
By unity of things is meant the perception of identity 
between Arvtha and Kéma established by a meditation on 
the: absence of difference between one’s own self, son and 
wife on the one hand and other corporeal beings on the 
other hand. 

O king! a person should perform actions with those 
objects which, in whatsoever place, by whatsoever agent, and 
from whatsoever source, are not prohibited for his use. In 
the absence of danger, he should not use other objects. O 
king ! a person performing these acts and others enumerated 
in the Vedas and duly discharging his duti duties attain to the 
state of the Lord and become worthy of His veneration, 
even if he continues to | livein his ome. O godly monarch! 
as ye, by sétving the lotus-feet of Krishna, have tided over 
many difficulties, and. have celebrated many sacrifices after 
having conquered the elephants the guardians of the heavenly 
quarters, so may ye also cross this (ocean of) existence 
through he instrumentality of that Lord, the protector of all. 
{n some past cycle,'I was born as a Gandharva, Upavarhana 
by name, very much respected by other Gandharvas, Possess- 
ed of beauty, loveliness, gracefulness, and an amiable person 
and spreading a sweet scent on all sides, I-was a favorite 
with the damsels. And lascivious and always intoxicated 
I used to pass my time inside my seraglio. Once upon a 
time, ata sacrifice celebrated by the celestials, the Gandhar- 
vaa and the Apsara damsels were called upon by the creators 


~ 


of the worlds, to chant verses in honor of Hari, Coming to | 


know of that invitation, like one insane, { went there sing- 
ing and surrounded by the women. The creators of the 
worlds informed of my contemptuous behaviour cursed me in 
anger saying :~"Devoid of thy prosperity be thou speedily 
born as a Sudra, for thou hast slighted us.’ Thereupon [ 
was born as the son of a female slave. Here aslo in conse- 


g2 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


quence of my keeping company with the reciters of the Vedas, 
‘and of my service unto them, I attained unto the sonship of 
Brahma, . : 
Ihave described unto thee the duties of a householder. 
By a due discharge of them, he is cleansed of all impiety 
and very soon attains to the dignity of the anchorites. 
Surely in this world, ye are immensly fortunate, in as much 
the sages that sanctify the worlds come to ye, and also the 
supreme Brahma himself disguised in hunan shape resideth 
in your abodes. This Krishna is the Brahma who is 
identified with the perception of the ecstacy of eternal 
emancipation which is sought by the illustrious sages. This 
great one is your beloved, friend, maternal cousin, soul, 
preceptor, executor of your commands, and worthy ‘of your 
adoration. Even Bhava and the lotus-sprung deity himself, 
have not been able, with the help’ of their intellects, to 
describe his semblance having attributed reality unto it. May 
that Lord of devotees be propitious unto us being worshipped 
with our reverence, self-control and abstinence from speech. 
THE AUSPICIOUS SUKA said:—Thus the foremost of the 

descendants of Bharata heard what was said by the divine 
sage Narada. Then greatly enraptured and overcome by 
devotion he worshipped Krishna. Thereafter the sage, 
' greeting Krishna and the descendant of Pritha, went away 
worshipped by them. King Yudhisthira was struck with 
wonder when he heard from the lips of Narada, that Krishna 
is the Supreme Brahma. Thus I'have related unto thee 
the genealogy of the different dynasties sprung from the 
daughters of Daksha. The celestials, the Asuras, the mortals 
and the mobile and the immobile universe ‘are all included 
in these dynasties. 


END oF Book VII. 


A 


PROSE ENGLISH TRANSLATION 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM. 


BOOK VIII. 


\ 


EDITED AND PUBLISHED BY 
MANMATHA NATH DUTT, M.A, M.R.AS. 
RECTOR, KESHUB ACADEMY. 


Author of the English Translation of the Ramayana, Vishuu- 
puranam, Gila and other work, 


CALCUTTA: 
\t Printep sy H. C. Dass, 
Exysium Press, 65/2 Beavon STREET. 


1896. 


BOOK VIII. 


een)? ae 


CONTENTS. 


_ Cuaprer I.—The description of Svayambhuva Swarochisha, 
Uttama and Témasa, Manu.—P. 1. : 

Cuarrer I].—The release of the elephant in fourth Manwan- 
tara,—~4. 

(Cuapter U11.—Pleased with hymning the Lord releases the 
elephant.—P. 7. 

Cuaprer JV.—Graha again becomes a Gandharva.—P. 11. 

Cuarter V.—The description of the fifth and sixth Munis, 
Brahmé with the deities hymns the Lord.—P. 14. 

Cuapter VI.—The deities worship Vishnu and endeavour to 
produce Ambrosia along with the Asuras.—P. 19. 

‘Cuarter VII.—Poison comes out first and Siva devours it at 
the request of all.—P. 23. 

Cuarrer VIII.—Lakshmi rises up and espouses Vishnu; then 
comes out Ambrosia with Dhanwantari ; the Asuras take it away by 
force and Vishnu assumes the form of a beautiful damsel.—P. 28. x 

CuarTer [X.—The Asuras give away the Ambrosia to Vishnu 
and he gives it to the celestials.—P, 32, ha 

Cuaprer X.—The encounter between gods and demons: Vishnu“ 
encourages the former.—P. 34. 

Cuarter XI.—Qn the destruction of the demons, the celestials 
are requested to stop. Sukra revives them.—P. 38. 

Cuaprer XII.—Mahadeva is fascinated by the damsel.—P. 42. 

Cuarrer XIIL.—The description of the Six Manwantaras.—P. 47. 

Cuapter XIV.—The actions of the various Manus are des- 
cribed.—P. 50, 

Cuaprer XV.—Vali performs the sacrifice and conquers heaven ; 
the deities fly away in fear.—P. 51. 

CuarTeR XVI.—Aditi laments for the disappearance of sons 
Kacyapa’s advice—P. 54. 

Cuartrer XVII.—Hari takes his birth as her son.—P, 59. 


ii 


Cuarrer XVIti—-The Lord descends as a-dwarf and' goés t6 the 
sacrifice of Vali: Vali-gives him. a promise.==P. 62. 

Cuarver XIX=The Lord wants fom him ground to cover three 
legs ; Vrigu prevents him. —P, 66. 

Citarror X¥X.==Vali satisfies his promise and the dwarf agsuines 
a huge shape-—P. 69. 

Crabtir XXI.—Vishnu binds Vali P. 73. 

Cuarrer Xfi=-Vali goes . to Sutala:. The lerd gives him a 
boon.—P. 76. 

Crarter XXTI—Indra again goes to heaven.~-P.=79, 

Cuarrir XXIV.—The seen ‘of Hait’s incarnation as a 
fish.— P, 82. 


BOOK VITTI. 


CHAPTER I: 


Ow: salutation to the reverend Vasudeva! 

. THe Auspicious KING spoke: O preceptor! I have heard 
in detail the history of the fgmily of the Sayambhuva in 
which were born ‘the creators of the universe. Do you 
(now) relate unto me the history of other Manus. O Brah- 
mant the learned celebrate the birth and acts of the great 
Hari during a Manwanttara. Do you relate them unto us, as 
we (heedfully) listen to your rehearsal. O Brahman! do 
you also unfold unto me what the Reverend one, who is 
the origin of the universe, did in past Manwantaras, what 
he is doing inthe present Manwantara, and what he will do 
ia the Manwantara that is to be. 

THEREAT THE Auseicious SAGE said:—In this Kalpa 
passed away six Manus, Sayambhuva and others. Of these 
the first was Sayambhuva himself. [ have narrated to you 
the genesis of the gods inthis (Manwantara). For the purpose 
of spreading knowledge and delivering his. preceptor, the 
Reverend One was born asthe sons of Manu’s daughters; 
Devahuti and Akuti. I have already related to you all about 
the worshipful Kapila. O glory of Kuru race! I shall now 
natrate unto you the doings of the worshipful Yajna cloyed 
with the sexual pleasures. That lord, Satarupa’s husband, 
renouncing royalty, in company with his wife, entered the 

E 


2 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


woods for the performance of penances. Pressing the earta 
with a single foot on the banks of the Sunanda for the space 
of a hundred years, he practised terrible austerities, and (at- 
length) uttered this. 

THE auspicious MANU said:—The creature doth (in 
no wise) know him who spreads consciousness over the 
world, but unto whom the creature cannot impart conscious- 
ness and who, when the creature lieth down, remains awake. 
This universe and every created object are pervaded by 
the presence and consciousness of the Deity. Do thou, 
therefore, reap happiness by resigning every thing to Him. 
Do not covet another’s riches. Neither any person nor 
any eye can behold that God, who, rides on Suparna, who 
is the abode of all beings, who hath neither beginning, nor 
end, nor middle, who hath none that is his own, and none 
that is not his own; who hath neither inside nor outside, 
from whom occur the beginning and the end of this universe, 
who is the universe itself, who is {all truth, and who is the 
perfect God-head. That Lord is increate, real, self-mani- 
festing, unchangeable, having the universe for his form, 
and many designations. He bringeth about the creation, 
etc., of this universe by means of his inherent power, yet, 
resigning his power by virtue of his knowledge, he re- 
maineth inactive. It is for this reason, that sages perform 
acts (at first) with the view of ultimately giving them up. 
The person that energiseth (in the first instance), at length 
engages in action. The Omnipotent Lord engageth in acts, 
but doth not suffer them to attract Him ; so those persons 
that follow in his wake have not to despond, but compass 
consummation by the attainment of self-control. I take 
refuge ander -that Lord, who staying in the paths respec. 
tively adopted by him (in various incarnations) performeth 
acts proper to each, yet who is devoid of pride, who is with- 
out desire, and absolute, whois not urged by others, who 
teacheth men, and wlro is the origin of all religions. 


SRiMADBHAGABATAM. 3 


THE AUSPICIOUS SUKA said:—As with his thoughts con- 
centrated, he was reciting this religious formula, Asuras and 
Yatudhanas, seeing him (thus engaged) rushed towards him, 
afflicted with hunger. Seeing them act thus, the Omnipre- 
sent Hari, who is sacrifice, slew them in company with the 
Yamas, and assumed the sovereignty of the celestial regions. 
The second Manu named Swirochisha, was the offspring 
of Agni. His sons were Dyumat, Sushena, and Rochishmat. 
At this (Manwantara) were Rochana, as Indra, and Tushit 
and the others as gods, and Urgya, Stambha, etc. the seven 
Brahma-knowing Rishis. The sage Vedagira had Tushita for 
his wife. She gave birth tothe deity distinguished under 
the name of Bibbu. Eighty thousand vow-observing an- 
chorets learnt vows from this sage who led the Brahma- 
charyya mode of life from his early youth. The third Manu, 
was Uttama son of Priyavrata. His sons, O king! were 
Pavana, Sringaya, Yagmapatra and others. At this period 
Pramada and the rest, sons unto Vasishtha, were seven 
sages. The deities were Satya, Devagruta and Bhadra, and 
the Indra was Satyajit. It was during this period that the 
reverend Purushottam, was born with Satyavrata as 
the son of Dharma by  Sunrita, became celebrated as 
Satyasena. He becoming the friend of Satyajit. slaught- 
ered wicked and impious Yakhshas and Rakshashas of false 
vows, and also there given to afflicting beings. The 
fourth Manu, brother of Uttama, was named Tamasa. He 
had ten sons, Pritha, Khyati, Nara, Ketu, ete. In this 
Manwantara there were the gods going under the (generic 
names of Satyaka, Hari, and Vira, the Indra was Trigikha. 
Now also sprang the seven sages Jyotirdhdma and others. 
(In this Manwantara) and so those also sprang the gods named 
Vaidhritis, sons of, Vidhriti, who by their energy, held up the 
Vedas which were being destroyed by time. (In this Man- 
wantata also) was born Hari, as the son of Harimedhashw by 
Harini, who rescued the foremost of elephants from a alligator- 


4 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


THE AUSPICIOUS MONARCH asked:—O Vadarayani, we 
are curious to know from you kow Hari rescued the fore- 
most of elephants from a alligator. Surely that recitation 
which sings the praises of the Omnipotent, and illustrious 
Hari, must be fraught with mighty religious merit, and filled 
with blessings, auspiciousness and well-being. 

Tut SuTA THEREAT said:—Thus asked by - Parikshit 
seated with the determination to fast to death to. narrate 
this story, Vadarayani well-pleased, paying homage unto 
the monarch, began his narration in that assembly-of asce- 
tics, with, ‘ Listen, ye Vipras.’ » 


‘00: 


CHAPTER II. 


lag AUSPICIOUS SUKA spoke :—O king! there was a 
great mountain, known under the name of Trikuta, surroun- 
ded on all sides by’ the sea of milk, towering an Ayuta 
Yoyanas, and exceedingly beautiful,to behold. It was as, 
many Yoyanas in circumference; and adorning the ocean 
and the cardinal points, it stood with a triad’ of summits, 
composed respectively of iron, silver, and gold, and it stood 
charming all sides with other summits embellished with 
various gems and metals, with the murmuring of the 
water of its fountains, with trees and shrubs; and’ with 
valley filled with sporting Siddhas and Charanas, .. Gan- 
dharvas, Vidyadharas, and mighty serpents, Kinnaras, 
and Apsaras. (The mountain) having its base beaten with 
waves all round, darkened the adjacent tracts and made 
them appear as if: paved with green emerald stone. There, 
inthe meuntain caves resounded with musjcal notes, 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM, 5 


proud lions roared (constantly), from fear” of their foes, and 
incapable of bearing (with them.) The mountain em- 
bosomed valleys decked out with various wild animals, 
contained sweet-throated birds ‘in celestial gardens 
teeming with diverse trees. And the mountain contained 
pellucid streams and sheets of water,—and shoals with 
sands resembling rubies; and its waters and breezes were 
fragrant in conseqtence of celestial damsels having per- 
formed their ablutions there. In one of the valleys there 
was the garden of the great and high-souled Varuna, named 
Ritumat, which was the sporting-ground of celestial females. 
And it was garnished everywhere with trees, bearing flowers 
and fruits at all seasons; it was stocked with Mandaras, 
Parijatas, Patalas, Acokas, Champakas, Mangoes, Piy4las, 
Panasas, Amras, Amratakas, Kramukas, Cocoanuts, Dates 
Vijapurakas, Madhukas, Salas, Palmyra palms, Tam§las, 
Asanas, Arjunas, Arishtas, Udumvaras, Plakshas, Bainans | 
Kinsukas, Sandal-trees, Pichumarddas, Kovidaras, Saralas, 
Debdarus, Vines, plantains, Rose-apples, Vadaris, Akshas, 
Abhayas, Amalas, -Vilwas, Kapithwas, Jamvias, and various 
other trees. In that mountain ‘there was a spacious tank 
resplendent with golden lotuses, beautified with lilies, 
Utpalas, Kecharas and Satapatras. It rang (ceaselessly) 
with the hum of maddened black bees; and with the 
melodious notes of various fowls. And it was thronged with 
swans, ruddy geese, Chakrabakas, and cranes. And it echoed 
with the cries of water-fowls, Koyastis, and Datyuhas 
in hundreds; and the waters there were covered with the 
farina of lotuses shaken in consequence of fishes and tor- 
toises playing about. And it was netted round with 
Kadamvas, canes, Nalas, Nipas, Vanjulakas, Kundas, Kuru- 
vakas, Acokas, Shirishas, Kutajas, Ingudas, Kuvjakas, Swar- 
nayuthis, Nagas, Punnagas, Yatis, Mallikas, Satapatras, 
Madhabhis, etc. And the mountain was adorned with trees 
on its banks, bearing flowers and fruits in all seasons. 


6 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


Once on a time the leader of an elephant, dwelling in that 
forest, accompanied by female elephants, ranging about, 
fell to breaking large trees, and a large thorny bust con- 
sisting of canes and Kichaka bamboos. Having a scent of 
him, lions and mighty elephants, tigers, and other animals, 
—beasts of prey, and rhinoceroses, and huge serpents, and 
white and black Sarabhas and Chamaris, stricken with fright, 
at once fled in all directions. But beasts of comparatively 
inferior mettle, such as wolves, boars, buffaloes, bears, 
porcupines, Gopuchchhas, Thalavrikas, monkeys, hares, etc., 
used to range securely elsewhere by his sufferance. And 
surrounded by male and female elephants oppressed with 
heat, and followed by the young elephant dropping temporal 
juice, and accompanied by swarms of black bees feasting 
thereon, he, shaking the mountain to its centre with his 
weight, with eyes wild from youthful vigor, from afar smelt 
the fragrent breeze of the tank covered with, lotus-dust, and 
swiftly ran to the tank, in company with his herd parching 
with thirst. And then bathing in the pond containing 
transcendent and nectarine water, and covered with the dust 
of various species of lotuses, drank his fill, raising the water 
with his trunk. And having refreshed himself with a bath 
in the water, like an affectionate householder, he bathed the 
elephant young and the she-elephants by raising the water 
with his trunk, and splashing the same on their persons,— 
and also made them drink of it. But intoxicated with 
energy, he, deprived of his sense by the’ illusory power of 
the self-create, did not percieve that his conduct was inflict- 
ing pain on others. And it came to pass that commissioned 
by Sovereign Destiny, a powerful alligator, fired with, wrath, 
seized him by the leg. Falling into this mishap, that ex- 
ceedingly mighty:one put forth all his strength. And on 
lord of the herd being violently .pulled by that powerful (alli+ 
gator), the female ‘elephants, set up shrieks in a forlorn 
condition of mind; while the. rest, although seizing fast by 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 7 


his leg, did not succeed in rescuing him. And O lord of 
Earth, as the alligator and that mighty elephant thus faught 
pulling each other respectively from inside and outside, a 
thousand years rolled away, without seeing either of them 
give up the ghost,—and thereat the immortals marvelled 
greatly. And after along lapse of time the spirit, strength, - 
and vigor of the organs of that foremost of elephants under- 
went a\mighty deterioration,_—while he, dragged in the 
water, grew feebler and feebler,the reverse was the case with 
that denizen of the water. Falling into this peril threaten- 
ing his life, and waxing exceeding feeble that one bearing 
a body, being incapable of resembling himself, reflected 
for a long time, and then hit upon this plan. “These 
elephant kinsmen ‘of mine are incapable of delivering me, 
who have come by his sad plight. How, then, can the female 
elephants succeed in doing so? And ensnared by the 
Deity in the form of an alligator, neither can I myself, 
succeed in liberating myself. Therefore I shall seek the 
protection of the Supreme Lord, who is the refuge even 
of Brahma and the other deities. I must seek the refuge of 
that Lord who rescueth a forlorn and affrighted one, vehe- 
mently. pursued with terrific speed by a serpent resembling 
the Destroyer, and from fear uf whom Death himself flies 
away.” 


CHAPTER Ill. 


si AUSPICIOUS VADARAYANI spoke :—-Having thus 
made up his mind, the elephant, concentrating his thoughts 
within his heart recited the great hymn which he had learm 


8 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


in his former birth. The mighty elephant said :—"Salutations 
unto that Reverend One who endues all beings with con- 
sciousness ; who is the Soul of the universe, who constitutes 
the germens of this frame’of things and who is the Supreme 
‘Diety. I can but contemplate Himself. I take rufuge 
under that Self-create one in whom is established this 
(universe), from whom it hath sprung, by whom it hath 
been created and who Himself constitutes it, and--who is 
distinct from cause and effect. May he, who witnesses both 
the evolution and dissolution of this universe established in 
himself by his energy of illusion, who manifests himself 
(by his own power), and, who manifests even things what 
themselves manifest other things, protect me. May that 
Lord protect me who presided over the profound dark- 
ness that alone remained after the worlds together with 
their guardians had met with dissolution and what 
inferior people can understand or describe him, whose 
nature cannot be understood even by the saints and celes- 
tials,—who is incomprehensible, and who performs actions 
in various forms, like a mine. May that one be my refuge, 
desirous of beholding whose .blessed state eminently pious 
ascetics, renouncing company, and identifying every: object 
with self, lead the heart-whole Brahmacharyya mode of 
existence! Salutation unto Him who hath no biith, no 
act,no name, no form, no ‘merit, no demerit, yet who, 
for the purpose of Creating and destroying beings by 
virtue of his energy of illusion, assumes various forms in 
harmony with the exigencies of respective times; (salutations 
unto) the highest Lord, unto Brahma, unto Him of infinite 
power, without form, yet with countless ones,—salutation 
unto Him of wonderful works. Salutation unto Him who 
is capable of being attained only by following a life of 
mendicancy, without the Principles, and devoid of acts, 
‘unto the lord of emancipation,—who confers the blessings 
tof Nirvana. Salutation unto Him who is peace; who is 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 9 


terrific, who is fatuous, who acts®in accordance with the 
Principlés, who is without difference, who is even-natured, 
who has profound intelligence. Salutation unto Thee, 
who art the Soul, who art the Lord of Religion, who art the 
Witness (par excellence) unto the Purusha, unto the Origin 
of all, and unto the origin of Prakriti herself; Salutation 
unto Him who sees all the objects of the senses, who is 
shadowed forth by the functions of the organs, and who is 
betokened by shadows consisting of the unreal, even as at 
image mirrored in water betokeneth the object reflected, and 
whose presence is slightly perceptible as guilding the face 
of Nature. Salutation, unto Thee, who art the cause of the 
All, who art thyself causeless, who dost constitute the won- 
drous Cause of creations, who art all the Yamas, who art 
the mighty Main, the emancipation, and the greatest refuge 
of every creature, Salutation unto Him who is knowledge 
concealed under attributes, like fire lying concealed in an 
Arani, who hath renounced injunctions and interdictions alike 
by virtue of his self-knowledge, and who manifests himself 
by his own power. Salutation unto Thee who severst the 
falter_of ignorance of persons like me, who art emancipated, 
who art ranning over with mercy, and who art never idle; who 
as the ranger of hearts makest up the knowledge of all cor- 
porate beings, who art capable of resembling every creature, 
and who, withal, knowest no division. Salutation unto Thee 
who art incapable of being attained by those attached to 
their bodies, sons, friends, houses, wealth, servants, etc., 
who art devoid of qualities and company, who art realised 
in the hearts of emancipated souls, who art the Omnipotent 
spirit instinct with knowledge. May that one, of boundless 
mercy worshipping whom persons, seeking righteousness, 
desire and deliverance obtain their wished-for objects, as 
well as other blessings and undeteriorating bodies, bring 
about my deliverance. I hymn Him who is the Supreme 
Brahma, and Prime Lord, who is the word, who is capable 
s. . 


10 : SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


‘of being attained’ by spirtual Yoga, who is sung by «persons 
devoted to. Him, and sunk in a sea of joy, whose ex- 
ceedingly wonderful and auspicious nature fraught with 
treasures untold in- the presence of the. Almighty Lord, 
desires nothing whatever, who is above the range of the 
senses, subtle, distant, and absolute, and who is the origiti 
of every thing with a modicum of whose energy the mobile 
and the immobile, the deities, Brahma, etc,, the Vedas, and 
the worlds have been created under diverse designations 
and in different forms. He, from whom have sprung the 
stream of qualities, intelligence, mind, and the body, even 
as the tongue of a flame issues, from the same, or as the 
rays of the sun issue from the sun, and as each of these 
becomes extinct respectively in the sun and fire, is not 
a deity or an Asura, ora bird or beast of the midsphere, : or 
a female ora male ora hermaphrodite; He is neither any 
quality, nor act; He is neither existent or non-existent—~ 
He consists of that which extends after every thing that finds 
its limit, and He is an infinity of souls by virtue of his energy 
of illusion ; may that Being compass my good, ‘I do not seek 
for life. What have [ to do with this elephant-birth. hemming 
me round internally and externally ; but I crave that emancipa- 
tion which time cannot touch, and which lifts the veil from 
the light (of self-knowledge). I bow to that creator of the 
universe, having the universe for. his form, who is beyond .the 
universe, who is the contents of the Veda, the soul of the 
universe, the unsprung (Lord); and the supreme way of 
every creature. I bow down unto that foremost of Youis 
who is beheld by Yogis, who have burnt up their acts by 
Yoga, and who is perceived by them in their hearts through 
the force of Yoga. Salutation unto Thee, the vigor of whose 
three Principles is irresistible, who dost manifest thyself 
as the objects of the senses, and who art incapable of being 
attained ‘by persons of perverse sense. I bow down unto 
that Deity, inconsequence of having their souls enveloped 
— . 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 133 


in whose energy (of illusion), peopte do not perceive them 
and who is difficult of being obtained. } 

.. THE AusPicious SUKA spoke:—“When Brahma and the 
other deities, priding themselves on their respective forms of 
various kinds, did not approach on hearing the unspecializing 
hymn of the eléphant, that soul of every being, Hari, having 
a form synthetical of. those of all the deities, made his ap. - 
pearance on the scene. Seeing the elephant thus distressed, 
and hearing his hymn, that stay of the universe, in company 
with the celestials singing his praises, riding on Garuda, 
ranging everywhere at his will, and equipped with his 
weapon, the discus, siviftly appeared on the spot where that 
foremost of elephants was (thus plunged in peril.) Seeing 
Hari stay in the heaven, mounted on Garutman, with his 
discus upraised, the elephant lifted up his trunk holding a 
lotus, and spoke with difficulty —O “Narayana ! Q preceptor 
of every creature! I bow unto thee.” Seeing him in travail, 
the Self-create melted in mercy, speedily descended (from 
Garuda), and dragged out both the elephant and the alligator 
and cutting off the head of the latter with his discus, 
delivered the former in the sight of the celestials assembled, 


' 


. CHAPTER IV. eis 


Te AUSPICIOUS SUKA said :—(Seeing this) the celestial 
saints, the Gandharvas, headed by Brahm& and I¢ana, 
showered blossoms, (on Hari) extolling that deed of his. And 
celestial kettle-drums were sounded, and the Gandharvas 
danced and sang, and saints and Charanas and Siddhas sang 
that foremost of males. And he, that was the alligator, viz 


12 SRIMABBHAGABATAM. 


Huhu, foremost of the Gandharvas, freed from the curse of 
Devala, now wore a wonderful form. And bowing his head 
down to the Lord of illustrious worth, knowing no décay, 
he celebrated in sang that home of ‘renown, that one furnish- 
ed with virtues worthy of being extolled, that one whose 
story is a repository of excellences. And having enlisted 
the compassion of the Lord, that one, cleansed from lis sin, 
saluted and performed rounds about him, and ascended the 
region of the Gandharvas in the presence of every beholders 
And by. virtue of his having been touched by the Reverend 
One (the celestial elephant) freed from the fetters of igno- 
rance, attained the form of the latter, furnished with four 
arms and clad in a yellow raiment. Formerly he was a 
monarch——the crown of those dwelling in a Dravira--re- 
nowned under the name of Indradyumna, devoted to the 
worship of Vishnu. Once on a time dwelling in a hermitage 
in the Kulachala, that self-controlled One, observing the 
vow of silence, wearing a head of matted-locks, leading a life 
of. self-mortification and performing his ablutions (regularly) 
was engaged in the worship of the Lord Hag. And it came 
to pass that, accompanied by his disciples, there came that 
highly renowned ‘sage (Agastya). And seeing (the king) 
silently seated in sclitude, without paying him homage due, 
the ascetic was wrought up with wrath. Thereupon that 
‘pious person inflicted this curse upon him. “Let this wicked 
wight, this one devoid of sense, this insulter of Brahmana, 
presently find Tamicra, He is as silent as an elephant.” 
THE AUSPICIOUS SUKA went on;—Having cursed the 
king in this way, the righteous Agastya departed ip ¢om- 
pany with his followers. And taking this as the decree of 
Destiny, Indradyumna entered into the existénce of an 
elephant, whiclf abolishes the memory of everything (con- 
nected with the Reverend One); although by virtie of his 
adorations of Hari he subsequently regained his reminis- 
cences. Having delivered that elephant-chief, the lotus: 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 13 


naveled (Deity) accompanied by the former converted into, 
- one of his followers, went to his wonderful abode, while 
Gandharvas, Siddhas and celestials lighted up strains extoll- 
ing his deed. O mighty king! illustrating the power of Krishna 
this deliverance of the elephant-chief, which I have described 
to you, and which you have heard, confers heaven and fame, 
destroys the sins of Kali;°and removes wicked dreams. O 
best of the Kurus! desirous of their well-being, twice-born 
ones, rising in the morning, and putifyieg themselves, recite 
this with the view of getting rid of various dreams. Then, 
O foremost of Kurus! in the hearing of all beings, the Lord, 
permeated with the essence of every objects, well-pleased, 
addressed the elephant-chief, the following names. “ 
AND THE AUSPICIOUS REVEREND ONE spoke :—Those 
that, rising up at the lattet part of the night, concentrating 
ahall remember me or thee or this tank, surrounded by hills, 
their thoughts and caves and woods, or these bushes of canes, 
and Kichakas bamboos, or these Devadaru trees, or these 
peaks, or these tracts consecrated to Brahmi, myself and Siva, 
or my favorite haunt—the sea of milk—or the shinning white 
Island, or Srivatsa, or Kaustabha, or my garland, or my: 
‘mace, naped Kaunvodaki, or Sudargana, or Panchajanya, 
or Suparna—Sovereign- of birds—or Sesha, or my subtle 
digits, the goddess, Sri, having her home it myself, or 
Brahmi, or the sage, Narada, ‘or Bhava, or Prahlada, or my 
deeds performed by my Incarnations, such as the Fish, 
Tortorise, the Boar,—fraught with infinite religious merit, 
or the Sun, or the Moon, or (the god of) Fire, or echaracter« 
istics or reverence, or the wife,of the Moon and Kacyapa, 
named Dakshydyani, or the Ganga, the Saraswati, the 
Nanda, or the Kalindi, or the White elephant, or the Dhruva, 
or the seven Brahmarishis, or eminently pious individuals, 
—or my Bibhuti,—those that remember these are cleansed 
from every sin O ornament of your tine. On these, that on 
the. departure of tit night, hymns me by means of this 


14 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


passages, I will’ bestow excellent state when they have 
- departed this life. 

THE AUSPICIOUS SUKA said :—Having uttered this behest, 
Hrishikega blew that best of conchs, gladdening the hearts. 
of the celestial hosts,—aind then ascended the Lord of birds. 


00. 


CHAPTER V. 


r 
[ HE AuSPICIOUS SUKA said:—I have now. related to 
_ you the sin-destroying story of Hari treating of his liberating 
the mighty elephant. Do you now listen to the sacred story 
of Raivata. The fifth Manu was named Raivata, whose 
brother: was Tamasa, His sons were Vali, Vindhy4 and 
others with Arjuaa at their head. (in this Manwantara) Vibhu 
.was Indra, the celestials were Bbutaraya, and thers . and 
Hiranyaroma, Vedasira, Urddhavahu, etc., were the tyice-born. 
Subhra’s wife was Vikuntha, of whom was born, with a por- 
tion of his energy, the reverend: Vaikuntha with the fore- 
most of celestials dwelling in Vaikuntha, It was to compass 
her pleasure that at the request of the divine, Rama 
he built Vaikuntha worshipped of alt the worlds. 
I have already described as all dignity and high 
perfections. He that can, describe the virtues of Vishnu 
can as well count the particles of Earth’s dust. The sixth 
_Manu was named Chakshusha, son unto Chakshusha. The 
sons of Chakshusha were Puru, Purusha, Sudyumna, and 
others. (In this Manwantara), Mantraduma was Indra, the 
deities were Apyadi, etc. and O king, Haryyasmat, Viraka, 
and others, were the ascetics. At thie period, the mighty’ 


SRIMADBUAGABATAM. 15 


lord of the universe, with a portion of his energy, and under 
the name of Ajita was born as the son of Vairaya in Deva- 
sambhuti and churning the sea, the obtained ambrosia in 
behalf of the celestials,—and wandering in the deep held 
_ up the Mandara, in the form of a tortoise. 

THE AUSPICIOUS MONARCH asked :—O Brahmana! do you 
relate the wonderful deeds of the mighty (Hari), as to how 
he churned the sea of milk, as to the object he had in doing 
so, as tothe way in which assuming the form of an aquatic 
animal, he held up the mountain, and in which the celestials 
obtained ambrosia,—and relate everything besides connected 
with this event. ° 

THE SutTA said :—O twice-born ones, thus questioned 
the reverend son of Dwaipayana, well-pleased, (thus) began 
to describe the prowess of Hari. 

AND THE auspicious Suka said :— When the deities, 
assailed in conflict by the Asuras with shining weapons, 
began to drop in numbers, deprived of their lives, and 
did not revive, when .in consonance with the. curse 
of ' Durvas&, the three regions with those of Indra, 
were bereft of all auspiciousness, and_ sacrifices and 
other cerémonies ceased to be perférmed, seeing this, the 
.celestials headed by Mahendra, and Varuna, held a con- 
clave for consultation, but failed to ascertain their cause. 
Thereat they in a body set out for the court of Brahm4, 
Situated on the crest of the Meru.; and, humbling themselves, 
acquainted Parameshthi with the state of things. Seeing 
Indra, the Wiid-god, and others, shorn of the strength and 
splendour, and seeing the regions plunged in misfortune, 
and the Asuras proportionately advanted, the Lord con- 
Centrating his thoughts remembered the prime Purusha, and 
that Supreme and Omnipotent being with his countenance 
expanded in emotion, thas addressed the gods, saying,— 
‘Let us seek the refuge of that undecaying One 

a portion of whose energy hath brought into being myself, 


a r 


15 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


Bhava, You all, Asuras, human beings, beasts, trees, and 
creatures generated by heat and damp. He hath none who 
deserve to be slain, nor any that are warthy of being protect- 
ed by Him, yet He in the fullness of time assumes the 
principles of goodness, energy and dullness for the purpose 
of creation, protection and dissolution. Now is time for’ 
his maintaining and sustaining creatures, and for maintain- 
ing corporeal beings, he stayeth, assuming the Principles of 
goodness. Therefore we will take refuge with the Precep- 
tor of the universe : attached to the celestials, He will bring 
about our welfare, as we constitute his kindred. 

THE AUuSeICIOUS SUKA went on :—Having thus spoken 
to the celestials, Vedha, O repressor of foes, in company 
with the deities, went to the transcendental regions of the 
Invincible One, lying beyond the region of Dullness. Afriv- 
ing at that place, the Lord, concentrating his thoughts, in 
the language of Veda, began to hymn him whosé form is 
incapable of being beheld, but of whom (Brahmé) had -heard 
‘before. : = 

AND THE AUSPICIOUS BRAHMA said:—O god, we bow 
down to Thee who art above change, who art the Truth, who 
‘art infinite, who ‘wert at the beginning, who ‘rangest in 
every heart, who hath no form, who art incapable of being 
reached by argument, who outruns even thought, who cans 
not be described by speech, who is worthy, and who art thé 
prime. We take refuge under that one who is cognisant 
of life, mind, intellect and soul, who manifests himself as 
both organs and the things on which théy éxercise them- 
selves, who is free from ignorance resembling the ignorance 
ofa person beholding a dream, who is without 4 body, who 
pervades everywhere like the sky, who is devoid;of know 
‘edge and ignorance, who is eternal felicity, and who appears 
‘in, the three Yugas. Let us résort to that eternal Deity 
-who is called the nave (support) of the wheel (body) 
,of a creature, which is set to action by the illusive energy, 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. ~ 17 
’ 

which is at one with mind, which has fifteen rods (ten 
Organs of sense and five vital breaths), which has three 
(qualities) naves, eight fellies and which is fickle as the light- 
ning; who is identical with knowledge, beyond the quality 
of darkness, who is visible and invisible,,who is without 
end and eternal, who is seated on Garuda, and whom the 
patient sages adore with asceticism. We bow unto Him, 
whose illusive energy cannot be assailed by any, and by 
which creatures are possessed and cannot know themselves, 
who has conquered His Atman and its qualities, who is 
the great Lord and who equally abides in all creatures. 
We, who have been created by his favourite quality of 
goodness, have not. been able to comprehend his subtle 
form equally manifest internally and externally, how can 
Asurasas and other leading creatures? May that Great. 
Purusha Brahman, who is Great in’ Himself and endued 
with, great effulgence, whose foot is this earth created _by 
himself and wherein exists the fourfold creation, be pro- 
pitiated with us. May He, endued with great wealth 
(spiritual), be: pleased with us, whose seminal fluid is the 
water from which have been engendered the creatures 
and the presiding deities and by which they sustain them- 
selves and are noprished. May He of great spiritual wealth 
whose mind is Soma, who is the food of the celestials and 
is therefore. their life and strength and who is the nourisher 
of all trees and creatures, be propitiated with us. May He, 
of great spiritual wealth, be pleased with us, whose mouth 
is fire, from which have originated the Vedas, and which is 
engendered for the performance of Vedic rites and which 
in. the belly cooks the food. May He, of great spiritual 
wealth, be pleased with us whose eye is the sun, who is 
the presiding deity of the roads of the celestials identical 
with three sorts of learning, who is the place of worship 
for Brahm, who is the road to final liberation, who is eternal 
and identical with death. May He, of great spirityal wealth, 


3 


18 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


be propitiated with us,-proceeding from whose vital breath 
the wind constitutes the strength, energy and vital power 
of all creatures, mobile and immobile and whom we follow 
as the servants follow their masters. May He, of great 
spiritual wealth, be propitiated with us from whose ears have 
originated the quarters, from whose heart the pores of the 
body and from whose navel the sky which is the stay of 
vital breath, organs of sense, the air and the body. May 


' He, of great spiritual wealth, be propitiated with us from 


whose energy has originated Mahendra, from whose delight 
the celestials, from whose anger Girisha, from whose intellect 
Brahma, from whose pores the Vedas and from whose organ 
of excretion have originated the Rishis and the patriarchs. 
May He, of great spiritual wealth, be pleased with us from 
whose breast has sprung Sree, from whose shadow the Pitris, 
from whose breast virtue, from whose back vice, from 
whose head the heaven and from organ of enjoyment Asuras. 
May He, ‘of great spiritual wealth be propitiated with us,’ 
from whose mouth have originated the Brahmanas and the 
secret Vedas, from whose arms the Kshatriyas and the 
strength, from whose thighs the Vaisyas and their skill and 
from whose feet the Sudras and the spirit of servility. May 
Hé, of great spiritual wealth, be propitiated with us from 
whose lips has originated avarice, from the upper lip delight, 
from nose physical grace and from whose touch the desire 
which is so beneficial to the beasts, from whose eye-brows 
the God of Death and from whose eye-lashes Kala. May 
He, endued with great spiritual wealth, be pleased unto us, 
by whose illusive energy of Yoga, as designated by the 
great, have been created the elements, time, actions, qual- 
ities and this world, for they are all hard of being con- 
ceived even by the great intellects. Salutation unto Him, 
whose energy is quiescent, whose Avian is perfect for attain- | 
ing to the kingdom of heaven, and is not attached to the 
qualities created by Maya and whose movements are like the 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 1g 


nir. Resorting to thee we are anxious to behold thine 
smiling, lotus-like countenance; do thou manifest thine own- 
self so that it may come within the range of our senses. 
Do thou, O lord, incarnating thyself, at times, of thy own 
accord, accomplish these actions, O great one, that are 
beyond our capability. The actions dedicated to’thee are 
not like those of bodied beings distressed with worldliness, 
which are productive of immense miseries and of lesser 
fruits. Even the least practice of action, when dedicated to 
the Deity, does not lead to fruitlessness ; for He (the Deity) 
is the soul of all people and therefore loving and well-wish- 
ing. As the sprinkling of water at the root of a tree leads to 
the -watering of its trunk and branches so the worship of 
Vishnu leads to worship of all others and Afman. Salutation 
unto thee whose nature and actions are above description, 
who art without end, devoid‘of qualities, lord of qualities and 
who always dost exist in thine true self. 


~—00. 


CHAPTER VI. 


Tie AUSPICIOUS SUKA said :—Being thus eulogised by 
the celestials, the Divine Lord Hari appeared in their view, 
effulgent like the rising of the thousand-rayed (Sun). The 
eyes of all the celestials were dazzled by that great (efful- 
gence) and they could not observe the sky, quarters, the 
earth and themselves, what to speak of the Lord. The 
Divine Brahma along with Siva (began to chant him) on 
beholding that body like the transparent emerald beautified 
with a pair of lotus-like eyes; it was clad with a yellow 
raiment like unto burning gold—all the limbs were graceful 


20 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


and lovely—the countenance was beautiful and the eye- 
brows were greatly charming ; it was decorated with a-crown 
crested with highly precious gems—adorned with two 
Keyuras and the lotus-like countenance was beautified with 
two ear-rings moving and adoring the two cheeks; it was 
adorned with Kanchukas, bracelets, necklace and Nupuras; 
on his throat was the Kaustabha jewel, onhis breast was Sree 
and around his neck was the garland of wild Sowers. He 
was being worshipped by his own weapons as Sudarshana 
and others assuming forms; the foremost of deities (Brahma) 
with Siva and with other immortals, saluting him with their 
all limbs down, ‘began to culogise that Greatest Purusha. 
THE AusPiIC!louUS BRAHMA said :—~Thyself being devoid 
of qualities: thou hast no birth, no existence and no self- 
control and art therefore the ocean of the felicity of annihi- 
lation ; salutation and _ salutation ‘unto thee of greatness, 
whose form is most subtle and beyond all calculation: O fore- 
most of Purushas, this thine form is being adored by persons 
desirous of welfare by means of Vedic and Tantric rites ; by 
means of Yoga we behold in thine universal form the three 
worlds along with ourselves. This universe existed in the 
beginning in thee, in whom the self predominates, exists in 
the middle and shall exist in the end; thou art the begin- 
ning, middle and end of this universe as earth constitutes 
those of a pot for thou dost reign supreme over the great. 
Thou didst, by thine own illusive energy, create this universe 
and then enter into it; so even at the end of qualities the 
learned and intelligent sages behold thee by their mind, as 
being devoid of qualities. By energetic endeavour people 
find fire in wood, clarified butter in cow, water and food in 
earth and livelihood in manliness, so the sages say that-thou 
existest in qualities and art perceived by understanding. O 
Jord} O lotus-navelled deity! beholding thee appear here, 
who art our much longed for object, we have been greatly 
delighted asthe elephants, assailed by forest-fire, are on 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 21 


seeing the water of the Ganges. Do thou now accomplish 
our object for which with all the Patriarchs we have arrived 
at thine foot; thou knowest endless things, what can others 
communicate unto thee? Myself, Girisha the other celes- 
tials, Daksha and other Patriarchs, have all been individually 
manifest from thee like scintillations ‘of fire and -have not . 
been able to comprehend thine effulgence ; do thou commn- 
nicate counsels unto the celestials and the twice-born ones. 

THE AUSPICIOUS SUKA said:—Being thus eulogised by 
Brahm& and other celestials and being apprised of thier 
object, the Divine One replied in words, grave as (the mut- 
tering of clouds) unto them all having their senses control- 
led and standing with folded palms. Though that lord of 
the celestials was alone capable of accomplishing their 
object still being desirous of, sporting with the churning of 
the ocean he gave vent to the following words :— 

THE DIVINE ONE said :—Alas! O Brahma! O Shambhu! 
O ye celestials and Gandharvas! do. ye with Attention listen 
to my word,—show your well-being may be accomplished. 
The Daityas and Danavas have obtained the favour of 
Shukracharya ; do ye make peace with them so long your 
multiplication does not become possible. When the object 
is very important, it is better for its accomplishment to make 
Peace with enemies asa serpent does with a mouse. Do 
ye soon endeavour for bringing out nectar drinking whereof 
éven the mortals become immortal. Throwing all creepers, 
grass and Oshkadhz in the ocean of milk, making the moun- 
tain of Mandara, the churning rod and V4suki the rope, 
do ye, by my help, assiduously churn it,—the demons shall 
only participate in thc uMliction and ye shall reap the 
fruits. O celestials ! do ye yield to whatever the Asuras will 
dictate—all the objects are easily accomplished by humility 
and not by anger. Be not afraid of the poison which shall 
Come eut of the ocean—nor do ye cherish any desire or 
anger (for that being not satisfied) for all objects of desire. 


22 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


THE AUSPICIOUS SUKA said :—Having’ thus instructed 
the celestials the Divine One, the most exalted Purusha, 
disappeared before them. O king! He is Divine One and 
hath His course at His will, Having bowed unto the Divine 
One, Brahma: and Siva’ repaired to their respective habita- 
tions; thereupon resolved having upon peace all the celes- 
tials went to Vali. The illustrious king of Daityas who 
was well-versed with opportune hours of making peace and 
‘warfare prevented his soldiers to kill them, who were worked 
up with anger on beholding the celestials, divested of 
armours and weapons. They then arrived at the place where 
Virochana’s son was, having conquered the three worlds, 
guarded by the leaders of Asura hosts and attended by highly 
beautiful damsels. Having consoled him with sweet words, 
the greatly intelligent Mahendra placed before him, as 
instructed by the Divine One, all the proposals of churning 
the ocean. His words pleased the king of Daityas as well as 
other Asura feaders who were present there as Shamvara: 
Aristhanemi, Pauloma, Kalkeya and other Asuras dwelling 

in Tripura. Thereupon making peace and friendship, O 
, slayer of enemies, the celestials and Asuras began to make 
huge preparations for finding out nectar. Thereupon those 
" irrepressible (celestials and Asuras) rooted out with great 
force the mount Mandira, and roaring proceeded towards the 
ocean ; though Indra with other celestials and Vali with other 
Danavas were very strong and their arms were like Parigha 
they were worn out for carrying it to a long distance 
and had to drop it on the way; and that golden mountain, 
by its great velocity, when falling crushed down number- 
less celestials and Asuras; thinking them as having their 
arms broken and minds dispirited, the Divine Lord, having 
Garuda as his emblem, arrived there and beholding the im:' 
mortals and Danavas crushed down by the fall of mountain 
revived them by his looks; and then easily with one hand 
placing it cn the back of Garuda and. himself mounting him 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. : 23 


he proceeded towards the ocean surrounded by the celestials 
and Asuras. Having placed it down from his shoulders, 
that best of birds, despatched by Hari went away leaving 
the bank of the ocean. 


CHAPTER VIL. 


41a AUSPICIOUS SUKA said:—O foremost of JKurus, 
saying unto Vasuki “thou shalt also participate in the nectar 
that shall arise from the churning of the ocean” the celes- 
tials and Asuras making him the rope bound him round the 
mount Mandara and then with controlled minds began to 
to churn (the ocean) for nectar. Hari at first held the fore- 
_part of the rope (Vasuki) and the celestials also proceeded 
towards it; considering it as an act of manliness the leading 
Daityas said “we have studied the Vedas and listened to 
Shastras and we are famous for our birth and actions we 
shall not hold the inauspicious hind  part.’’? Beholding 
the Daityas stand still that foremost of the Purusha smiled 
and leaving off the fore-part held the hind one along with 
the immortals. Making a division of the place the children 
of Kashypa, with great assiduity, began fo churn the ocean 
for nectar; although held with great force, O descendant 
of Pandutthat mountain, having no support, sipped off 
into the midst of ocean, Having their manliness destroyed 
by the powerful destiny their minds were greatly dejected 
and their countenances became pale. Beholding that ordi- 
nance of the lord of obstacles, that lord of irrepressible 
energy and true determination, assuming the wondrous form 
of a tortoise, dived into the ocean and held up the mountain. 


24 - SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


Beholding that mountain taken up, the celestials and Asuras 
again assiduously addressed themselves for churning; he, 
‘Jike another huge.island, held it up on his back.extending, 
over a billion of Yoyanas. Being shaken by the velocity of 
the arms of these leading celestials and Asuras the mountain 
began to move on its back; and that incomparable prime 
tortoise considered those movements as the itchings of his 
limbs. Having entered in the midst of the Asurasin Asura 
form he increased their strength and prowess. and having 
entered amongst the celestials in his celestial form he 
excited them all; and imperceptibly entering within the 
serpent made it also stronger; thereupon assuming a thou- 
sands arms, he stood there like another mountain, holding 
up that mountain by his hand; he stood there being eulo- 
gised by Brahma, Siva and Indra in heaven and being 
showered upon by flowers.’ He having’ entered upwards, 
downwards and his ‘own self, the mountain Vasuki, they, 
excited with pride, assiduously so churned the ocean by 
means of the great mountain that within a short time the 
whole host of the acquatic animals were agitated. There- 
upon fire and smoke issuing from the thousand dreadful 
mouths of Vasuki and his breaths, the energy of the Asuras, 
named Pualoma, Kaleya, Vali, Ilvala, was greatly over- 
powered ; they.were then deprived of their effulgence like 
a Sharala tree burnt down by the forest fire. The .clouds, 
subject to the command of the Divine one, poured showers, 
upon the celestials and the cool breezes of the waves of the 
ocean blow upon them who were also deprived of their 
energy by the fiery breaths of the serpent and whose coun- 
tenances, dresses and Kanchuka and other ornaments were 
also growing pale. The ocean being thus ‘churned, the 
fishes, Makaras, tortoises and snakes, Timis, water-elephe- 
phants, Nakras and Timingalas were all greatly agitated at 
first; and then arose therefrom a dreadful poison named 
Ffaléhala, Beholding that irrepressible poison, whose 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 25° 


action was difficult of being resisted and which was throw- | 
ing itself up and down; and-finding none to protect them, 
the patriarchs with subjects terrified took refuge unto Siva. 
Beholding that foremost of deities seated with his consort 
on the mount Kailasha for the creation of the three worlds 
and the ascetics performing devout penances, pleasing to 
him, for final eniancipation, the patriarchs bowed unto him, 
by chanting his glories. 

THE PATRIARCHS said :—O great Deity!O lord of the 
deities ! O thou identical with elemental creation ! we have 
taken thy shelter; do thou save us from the poison which is 
about to burn down the three worlds; thou art the lord of 
fettering and releasing the entire universe; the intelligent 
sages adore thee and thou dost remove the fear of thy 
votaries. O lord! by thy creative energy full of qualities, thou 
dost create, preserve and | destroy the universe—thy know- 
ledge is self-acquired and thou dost hold the threefold appel- 
lation of Brahma, Vishnu and Siva; thou art the greatly 
secret Brahman—from thee are manifest the real and non- 
real; thou art thy own Afman and art the universe in thine 
manifold energies and art therefore the great /svava. Thou 
art the root of the Vedas, the beginning of the universe, 
»Atman, the instrument of breaths, organs and objects, the 
(threefold) qualities, the nature, the time, determination and 
the virtue of truth and honesty ; and thou art the prime, and 
the ‘sages, cognisant of three-feld qualties, consider thee as 
their refuge. The fire is thy mouth; thou art identical with 
the entire host of the celestials; the earth is. thy lotus-foot, 
time is thine movement who art the soul of all the gods; the 
quarters are thine ears and the lord of waters is thine navel ; 
the wind is thy breath, the sun is thine eyes, the water is thy 
Vital fluid ; thine consciousness of self is the refuge of 
excellent and ordinary creatures; O divine lord! the 
Moon is thine mind and the heaven is thine head. The 
Oceans are thy belly, the mountains are*thy bones, all sorts 


4 


26 : SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 

of Oshadhis and creepers are the pores of thy body, the 
divisions of the Vedas are thy seven metats, and the three 
Vedas are thy form and the virtue is thy heart. O lord! 
the five Upanishads are thy mouth from which proceed 
thirty-eight mantras ; thou art the true essence of the Great 
soul known as Siva and thine condition of refraining 
from sexual enjoyment is the effulgence. Thine shadow. 
is the destroyer in the waves of impiety, and the 
qualities of goodness, darkness and ignorance are thine 
three eyes; ‘thou art the propounder_of scriptures; and 
the knowledge_of Sankhya philosophy is thine soul, 
and the ancient Veda composed of metres is thine eyes. 
O Girithra ! thine effulgence is beyond the, perception of all 
the Lokapalas as Brahma, Vishnu and Indra—wherein exists 
neither the quality of goodness, darkness, nor ignorance and: 
which is identical with Brahman in whom all differences have 
ceased. Thy destruction of Kama, (Daksha’s) sacrifices, 
Tripura, Kalakuta, and various other goblins, does not lead 
to thine eulogy for thou dost not even think of this universe 
reduced to ashes, at the time of dissolution, by the sparks 
of thine own eyes. Thase, who, consider thee, who art 
engaged in devout meditation and whose two feet are medi- 
tated upon by (the sages) in their hearts, who art self- 
controlled and’ the preceptor of the world, when in thé 
company of Um, as being addicted to tust and as cruel and 
ruthless when roving in the cremation ground, do not know 
thee, shameless as they are. Even Brahma cannot conceive 
thine true form which is different from the existent and 
non-existent and who art the Great Purusha, how can he 
then chant thine glories. We are very ordinary amongst 
his creation so (our chanting of thine glorles) is merely a 
measure of our own power. (We consider ourselves blessed) 
O lord | on beholding this thine form and not thy Great form 
for thine actions are not manifest and this thine appearance 
is for the protection of creatures, 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 27 


Tue AusPIcioUuS SuKA said :—Beholding their calamity 
and gteatly stricken with mercy that friend of all creatures 
thus said toshis beloved Sati :— 

“Alas behold, O Bhavani! the distress: of creatures, 
from the venom that has come out of the churning of 
the ocean of milk. It behoves me ‘to promise them 
protection who have been greatly distressed for this; the 
work of an able man is the protection of the poor; the 
pious save the creatures even by their own fickle lives. O 
auspicious lady! Hari, the soul of all creatures, is delighted 
with that person who extends his mercy towards those 
creatures, who possessed by the illusive energy of the great 
soul, injure each other. The Divine Hari being pleased, 
I too attain to delight along with the mobile and immobile, 
so I shall drink up their venom and may blessing proceed 
from me to the creatures.” 

Having said this \o Bhavani, that divine upholder of the 
‘universe addressed himself for drinking the venom ; she (too, 
cognisant of his prowess) began to delight. Placing on the 
cavity of his palm that venom capable of proceeding on all 
‘sides that great deity, the protector of creatures, out of 
mercy, drank it up.. That cursed watery venom also showed 
its power, for it rendered his neck blue and which has be- 
come an ornament for that pious deity. Generally the sages 
are distressed by the affliction of creatures. Being informed 
of the wondrous action of that Purusha the soul of the 
universe, all the Prajas, Dakshayani, Brahm& and Bikuntha 
began to praise him. The little that fell down while he 
drank was devoured by reptiles, snakes, the venomous 
Oshadhis and other Dandacukas, , 


CHAPTER VIII. ; 


1 : 
Tie AUSPICIOUS SUKA said:—The deity, having a 
bull for his emblem, drinking up that venom, the immar- 
tals and the Danavas were all pleased and with great 
force began to churn the ocean from which (then) arose 
Surabhi. O king! the Rishis, cognisant of the knowledge 
of Brahma, took her for Havd for the performance of 
those Agnihotra ceremonies by which one cain attain to 
the region of Brahma, Thereupon arose a horse vellow 
‘as the moon ‘named Uchchaicrava; for which Vali e¢x- 
pressed adesire and not Indra under the instrstructions 
of the Divine Lord. Thereupon arose Airavata, the 
king of elephants, who by his four teeth was pilfering the 
greatness of the Divine white mountain (Kailasha) ; there 
upon arose the eight’ elephants of quarters Airavana and 
others ; then the eight she-elephants, O king! as Avramu and 
others; then from the great occan arose the wondrous jen 
Kaustabha, brilliant as the lotus for which Hari, to adorn his 
breast, cherished a desire ; then arose the Parijita the orna: 
ment of the region of the celestials which grants the desires 
_ of all as thou dost always on this earth. Then were born 
the Apsaras whose throats were adorned with Neshkas and 
‘who wore beautiful raiments ; with graceful looks and‘ move- 
‘ments they created desire in the celestials. Thereupon 
arose the very Sree, the most exalted divine Ram, adorning - 
all the quarters with personal grace as does the lightiiing. 
Having their minds agitated by her beauty, grace, youthful- . 
ness, color and effulgence, all the celestials, Asuras and: man- 
kind cherished desire for her. Mahendra brought a won- 
drous seat for her and all the leading rivers brought pure 


- ‘SREIMADBHAGABATAM. ; 39 


water in golden jars. The earth, worthy of being sprinkled, 
brought all the Oshadhis; the cows brought five articles 
named Panchagarvya and the spring brought fruits and 
flowers born in the months. of Chaitra and Vaishakha. 
Then the Rishis laid down according to Shastras the. proper 
rites for ablution, the Gandharvas began to pour mellifluous 
‘notes and the dancing girls began to dance. Then the 
clouds began to pour forth the sounds of Méridanga, Panava, 
Muraja, Anaka, Gomukha and other musical instruments 
and -blew conchs, Vind and flutes. “Then the elephants of 
quarters with jars full of watér ‘and Vedic verses recited by 
the Brahmanas performed the ablution ceremony of the 
divine’ chaste’ Sree having lotus-like palms: the ocean 
hrought for her two pieces of yellow silken raiment ; Varuna 
the Vasjayanti garlands ‘accompanied by the hum of the 
maddened. black bees, the patriarch Visvakarman various 
‘wondrous dresses, Sarasvati_a garland, Brahma a lotus 
and the serpents Kuxdalas for. her; thereupon having thus 
got the auspicious ceremonies performed for her, and taking 
by her hand the lotus garland accompanied by the noise 
of bees she was about to ‘go; her face was greatly beauti- 
fied with Kundalas hanging on her cheek and with shameful 
stniles ; her breast were sprinkléd with sandal and Kumékuma ; 
thereupon moving here and there with the sound of her 
Nupuras she looked like a golden creeper. Beholding Hari 
as the eternal refuge in whom all the good qualities eternally 
exist she did not behold (the like) either amongst the Gandhar- 
vas, Siddhas, Asuras, Yakshas, Charanas or the celestials. 
“Forsooth one, having asceticism, has not been able to conquer 
anger, one having knowledge has not the disassociation ; 
somé are great but have not been able to conquer desire ; 
is he god who depends upon others? Some body has got 
piety, but not compassion for creatures, some has got re- 
nunciation but not for salvation ; some has prowess but not 
tried by time; devoid of all qualities (though) they are pot 


go SRIMADBHAGABATAM, 


my equal. Some body lives for ever but has not got aa. 
auspicious character; some has got the latter but the per- 
manancy of his life is hard of being known ; there is one (Siva) 
in whom both’ of these are found and ‘ihe has no blemishes 
but he is inauspiciousness (himself), but there is one who is 
perfectly auspicious but does ndt want me.” Judging thus 
Rami elected Mukunda (as her lord) who was greatly adorned’ 
with fidelity and many other virtues, endued with impartiality, 
untouched by three qualities, gifted with all accomplish- 
ments, who is satisfied with himself, and still wishes for 
{Animé &c.) ; she placed round his neck, the beautiful lotus 
garland that was in her hands and was sounded with the hum 
of the ‘maddened bees; and then silently stood near, indica- 
ting by her bashful smiles that she has obtained her own 
place. (Then) the father of the three worlds made his 
own breast the habitation of the mother Sree gifted with 
great effulgence ; Sree, too, with compassionate smiles, began 
to nourish her own subjects and the three worlds along with 
the protectors thereof; the followers of the celestials along 
with their wives began to sing and dance and play on the 
diverse musical instruments such as conch, drum and A7/rz- 
danga. Showering flowers and uttering AMantras that are 
dedicated to him the patriarchs headed by Brahma, Rudra, 
Angiras and others began to chant his glories ; and being 
looked upon by Sree, the celestials and other creatures 
along with patriarchs were gifted with good character 
and other accomplishments and attained to the most 
excellent gratification; and being disregarded by Lakshmi 
the avaricious Daityas agd Danavas were divested of their 
energy and sprightliness. Thereupon arose the celestial 
damsel, the lotus-eyed V4runi and by the command of 
Hari the Asuras took her; and the ocean was again 
churned by the Daityas desirous of having nectar, and then 
arose, O great king!a highly wondrous male being. His twa 
arms were high and plump, his neck was adorned with three 


SRIMADB HAGABATAM, 31 


lines like a conch and was beautifully round; he had a green 
garland and was adorned with various ornaments; he wore 
a yellow raiment, his breast was greatly spacious and _ his 
ears were adorned jewelled Kundalas. His hairs even to 
the very end were greatly beautiful, black and curling and 
he was gifted with the prowess of a lion; adorned with 
bracelet he was holding up jars filled with nectar; he 
descended from a portion of the very Divine Vishnu. He 
was the well-known Dhanwantari, the father of Ayurveda 
and an eater of sacrifice. Beholding the ~jar filled with 
nectar, the Asuras, desirous of appropriating the whole, 
took it by force ; the jar of nectar being thus pilfered 
by the Asuras the celestials were greatly dejected and 
took the refuge of Hari. Observing their depressed 
spirit the Divine Hari, granting the’ desires of His votaries 
(said) :— Be not dejected, I shall by my own illusive 
energy accomplish your object.” O king! then’ there 
arose a conflict amongst them who were all burning with 
desire for the nectar (and clamoured) “I shall take first, I 
shall take first, not you and not you.” | O king! the weak 
Diatyas, growing jealous, thus prevented the powerful ones, 
who had taken the jar, saying:-— The celestials too, who 
‘have equally toiled for this, deserve their portions as in the 
sacrifice of Satra; and this is the eternal virtue.” In the 
meantime the lord Vishnu, cognisant of all the means, 
assumed the form of a female, highly wonderful and above 
description. Her colour was blue like lotus, worthy of being: 
seen; she was perfectly beautiful; the ears were both equal 
and well-adorned ; the countenance had beautiful cheeks ahd 
nose, the belly was very thin in consequence of the weight 
of breast, on account of the rising youth; by the smell 
of the countenance the bees, attached, were humming 
and the eyes were terrified as if, in consequence thereof, 
The beautiful hairs were adorned with the garlands of 
full-blown Afallikés, the beautiful neck had a charming 


32 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


necklace ‘and the arms were adorned with Angadas: The 
island-like waist was covered with clean cloth and adorned 
with beautiful K@zché and the two moving feet with Nupuras. 
The minds of the leaders of Daityas were repeatedly being 
stricken with lust by her looks accompanied by the move- 
ments of eye-brows and beautiful smiles. 


CHAPTER IX. 


Te AUSPICIOUS SUKA said :—The Asuras divorced from 
friendship towards one another and throwing it (nectar) 
observed a damsel approaching (them). ‘Thereupon taking 
the jar of nectar, Hari, adorned with sidelong, smiles said :— 
“If you promise to accept what I decide, either good or 
bad, I shall then distribute this nectar.” Hearing her words 
the leading Asuras, not informed of her true measure, 
agreed, saying ‘So be it} then having fasted ttiey bathed, 
offered oblation to fire with Hav and saluted the cows, 
Brahmanas and the elemental creation; and.‘the Brahmanas 
then performed auspicious rites (for them). Then wearing new 
clothes according to their respective castes and well-adorned 
they sat on Kuga, having their tops directed to the- east. 
Thien the Asuras and the Devas having been seated with their 
faces directed towards the east, in (that room) fragrant with 
incense and adorned with garlands and lamps, she entered 
there, O king | with the jar in her hands ; her thighs were like 
the trunks of elephants, her waist was covered with a silken 
raiment, her movements were slow on account of the weight 
of the waist, her eyes were inebrite, her breast were like 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. r 33 


two jars; and moving her golden Nupuras she was making 
an indistinct sound. Beholding her, the companion of 
Lakshmi, known as the goddess Para, whose Kundalas were 
made of gold, whose, ears, nose, cheeks and countenance 
were highly charming and the cloth covering whose breast 
was loosened, the celestials and Asuras were beside them- 
selves with desire. Thinking that it is unfair to give nectar 
unto Asuras like unto milk to the serpents and considering 
them cruel by birth Achyuta did not distribute it amongst (the 
Asuras). - Then having arranged different rows the lord of the 
earth made them sit in their respective rows. Then taking the 
jac and beguiling the Daityas with sweet and highly honorable 
words he made the celestials, who were seated at distance, to 
drink the nectar, removing decrepitude and death. Then O 
king ! satisfying their self-made contract and thinking ill of 
the quarrel with a female, the Asuras, who had been shown 
affection, sat silently (there). Having made love to- 
wards her and been afraid lest there might be obstacle in it, 
they, greatly moved by honours (shown to them), did not 
speak any thing unpleasant. When it was announced by 
the moon and the sun, that R&ahu, assuming the form of a 
celestial, was seated in their row and drinking nectar, Hari, 
with his discus, sharp as arazor, cut off his head which feil 
down not being sufficiently nourished by nectar. His head 
was rendered immortal. So the unborn conferred upon it the 
dignity of a planet, who still, with hostile feeling, pursues 
the sun andthe moon at different Parvas. The celestials 
having consumed the nectar, the Divine Hari, the protector 
of the world, having renounced his female form, assumed 
his true one in the very presence of the Asuras who were 
_looking at Him. Although the place, time, instrument and 
the object, intellect and work were same both for the celestials 
and Asuras still the result became diversified ; He is worthy 
of being attended upon resorting to the refuge of whose lofus- 
feet the celestials reaped the fruit of nectar and the Daityas 


5 


34 SRIMADBHAGABATAM.. 


were deprived. Whatever, mankind perform for their body 
or children by means of wealth, life, action, mind and words, 
becomes futile in consequence of difference like unto giving 
water to the branches negtecting the. root, 


CHAPTER -X. 


Te AUSPICIOUS SUKA said :—O king’ | thé Daityas and 
Danavas, though engaged in action, could not obtain the nectar 
on account of their being inimical towards Vasudeva. Having 
obtained nectar and made his own votaries, the celestiats, drink 
it, He, O king ! seated on Garuda, went away before the very 
eyes of all creatures. Beholding the most accomplished piety 
of their enemies, the sons of Diti, stricken with jelousy, with 
uplifted weapons, fell upon the celestials. Thereupon the 
celestials, who were rendered all perfect by drinking nectar 
and who had taken refuge unto the feet of Narayana, began 
to fight in return with various weapons. Thereupon there . 
arose a highly terrible and hard encounter, capable of making 
down stand erect, on the banks of the ocean called the battle 
between the gods and demons. In that conflict, desirous 
of overpowering each other's enemies, they, holding each 
other, wounded them with daggers, arrows and various other 
weapons ; there arose a great noise from the sounds of conch, 
kettle-drum, A/ridanga, bugle, Damaru, as atso from— 
elephants, horses, cars, and infantry ; then the car-warriors, 
began to fight with the car-warriors, infantry against infantry, 
the cavalry against cavalry, the elephants against ‘the 
elephants ; some with camels, some with elephants, and some 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. : 35 


with asses pursued their enemies: some with Gaurmukhas, 
some with bear, some with tigers, some with lions, some 
with vultures, some with Kaka, crane, Vasa and other birds. 
Some with Timingilas, Sharabhas, buffaloes, rhinoceroses, 
cows, bulls and Gavayas proceeded to the field of battle ; 
some came with jackals, mice, hare, and men, some 
heroes with acquatic birds and those moving on land 
and various other creatures having monstrous forms; these, 
O king! came before both the rival armies. O descendant 
of Pandu! like the two oceans adorned with acquatic animals, 
the armies of the gods and demons, appeared beautiful with 
variagated pennons, unsullied white umbrella, the rod made of 
highly precious jem, Chamaras made of the feathers of pea- 
cocks, with clothes round the body raised up by the wind, head- 
dress, Sak¢zs, armour, dress and various weapons resplendent 
in the rays of the sun and with soldiers arranged in rows. O 
king ! in that battle, Virochana’s son Vali was the commander 
of the Asura army ; being seated on his car, the best of all, 
called Vaihayasa, coursing at will, made by Moya, fiilled with 
all acticles for warfare and all wonders, he shone like the 
moon rising from the mount ; even by discussion none could as- 
certain what it was.—sometimes visible and sometimes invisible, 
he was encircled by, the commanders and had two Chamaras 
on both the sides and umbrella over his head. And there were 
on all sides the Asuras—the commanders of various divisions 
—Namuchi, Samvara, Vana, Viprachitti, Ayomukha, Vimu- 
rdha, Kalanabha, Praheti, Heti, Ilvala, Sakuni, Bhutasan- 
tapa, Vajradanshtra, Virochona, Hayagriva, Shankushira, 
Kapila, Meghadundubhi, Taraka, Chakrajit, Shumbha, 
Nishumbha, Jambha, Utkala, Arishthanemi, Moya, the king 
of Tripura, Pauloma, Kaleya, Nivata, Kavacha and other 
Asuras who were pained for not being able to partake of the 
nectar ; all growing angry and vanquishing the immortals ia 
the field of battle, emitting leonine roars they began to blow 
their conchs. Beholding the Asuras thus maddened with their 


36 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


power, Indra, the king of the. celestial region, was greatly 
worked up with anger; he came to the welkin seated on 
Airavata the elephant of the quarter, like the sun coming 
to the mount of rising where the fountains produce waters. 
There came encircling him various deities with their convey- 
ances, weapons and flags and all the Lokapdlas headed by 
Vayu, Agni, and Varuna together with their own retinue. 
Thereupon facing each other, calling them by names, vilify- 
ing, inviting and entering before the rivals, gods and demons 
engaged in fight. Vali began to fight with Indra, Karikeya. 
with the Asura Taraka, Varuna* with Heti, O king ! Mitra 
with Praheti, Yama with Kalanabha, Viswakarma with 
Moya, Shamvara with Tasht&, and Virochana with the Sun. 
Namuchi faught with Ajita, Ashwinis with Vrishaparva 
and the sun with the hundred sons of Vali of whom the 
eldest was Vana. Then Soma faught with Rahu, Vayu with’ 
Puloma, the fierce goddess Vadrakali faught with Nishumbha 
and Shumbha, Vrishakapi with the Asura Jambha, Vibhavasu 
with Mahisha, Ilvala with Vatapi faught with Brahma’s son. 
O slayer of enemies } Durmursha faught with Kama, Utkala 
with mothers, Vrishaspati with Sukra, Shani with Naraka; 
Maruta with Nivatakavachas, the immortals Viswadevas faught 
with Kéaleya, the Rudras faught with Paulamas. Thus the 
Asuras and celestials selecting each his rival and fighting, 
being desirous of obtaining victory by dint of his prowess 
struck each other with daggers, Zomaras and various 
other weapons they incessntly cut down each other’s 
head with Bhushundi, discus, maces, © Hristi, Pattishas, 
-Shaktis and Vindhipalas. And elephants, horses, cars 
and various conveyances with infantry and riders were 
rendered into pieces by strokes of yarious weapons; 
their arms, thighs, shoulders and legs fell down severed ; 
and flags, bows, armours and dresses were torn into 
pieces. The dust heaved up from the battle-field trod- 
den by the celestials and others and the wheels of 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 37 


the cars first enshrouded the welkin and the sun and then 
wetted by the pouring of blood it desisted. The field of 
battle was .beautifully adorned with crowns and ear-rings, 
dropped down from heads, the eyes whereof were reddened 
with anger and the lips cut, as also with the well-dressed 
arms of the soldiers and thighs resembling the trunks 
of elephants. Then looking with the eyes of their cut off 
heads there arose a (number of) Kavandhas (headless spirits) 
who, fixing arrows on their bow-string, pursued the — soldiers. 
Thereupon Vali pierced Mahendra with ten arrows, his 
carrier Airavata with threé, with four the four protectors, 
and with one the driver, but before those swift-coursing 
shafts fell down, Sakra, smiling, sundered them all with his 
sharpened javelins. Beholding his excellent deed, (Vali) 
growing envious took up Shakti which was burning like a 
huge fire-brand in his hand and which (Indra, immediately) 
cut into pieces; he then took up a mace, then a Praga, then 
a Tomara and then Rishthi—(in this wise) whatever weapon 
he took up was cut into pieces by the Lord (Indra); there- 
upon disappearing from view the Asura created his demonaic 
illusion by which came upon the celestial host a huge 
mountain ; thereupon fell down trees burnt by the forest fire ; 
then mountains with summits sharp as scimitars fell upon the 
hostile army; then fell down huge serpents, Dandashukas 
(snakes) reptiles, lions, tigers, boars and huge elephants that 
crush down (every thing); O lords hundreds of she-demons 
naked and holding maces in their hands, and a host of 
Rakshasas raised up a cry of “cut them, pierce them”. 
Then in the sky huge clouds began dreadful and deep mut- 
terings and lightnings driven by the wind began to shower 
fire. And the great fire, created by the Asura having the 
wind as its charioteer and growing fierce like the fire of 
dissolution, began to burn down the celestial host. There- 
upon was seen on all sides the upheaving ocean (and 
the battle-field looked) dreadful by the waves and whirl- 


38 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


pools raised by the crushing wind. In this way the Daityas, 
of great illusive powers and unperceived motion, having 
created various illusions inthe field of battle, the celestial 
army met with a destruction. O king! when Indra and 
other deities did not find any remedy for it, they began to 
think of the Divine Lord, and the protector of the universe 
came there. Then came in view (the Lord) wearing a yellow 
raiment, having eyes like néw grown lotuses, holding eight 
weapons in his eight hands, placing his two feet upon 
Garuda and adorned with Sree, Kaustabha, a highly‘precious 
crown and a pair of picturesque ear-rings. On his entering 
the (battle-field) all the great influences of illusion produced 
by the incantation of Asuras disappeared as a dream-dis- 
appears with the waking; the remembrance of the greatly 
glorious Hari frees (one) from (all) calamities. Beholding 
Him on Garuda in battle, Kalanemi, seated on lion, discharged 
a huge mace, taking it easily which’ fell on the head of 
Garuda. O king! the lord of the three worlds killed with 
it the enemy together with his carrier. Having their heads 
sundered by his discus the highly powerful Mali and Sumali 
fell in the battle-field ; and seeing Him thus when Malyavaa 
took up his fierce club to slay Garuda, the Prime Person 
with his discus cut off, his head. 


CHAPTER XI. 


je Auspicious SuUKA said :—Having regained their 
consciousness by the mercy of the Great Purusha the celes- 
tials assailed severely in the encounter those enemies by 
whom they had been assailed before. While the Divine 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 39 


chastiser of Paka took up his thunder-bolt for striking 
Virochana’s son all the creatures exclaimed saying, “ Alas} 
Oh!” Vilifying him, who, intelligent (as he was) while roar- 
ing in the battle-field well-dressed, stood before him, the 
wielder of the thunder-bolt said:—“ As a vile robber, ob- 
structing the ears and eyes of a child, pilfers him so, O 
stupid fellow! you wish to vanquish us having overpowered 
us by your illusion. O master of illusions! I throw down those 
ignorant creatures to a lower level than what they occupy 
who by their illusive powers desire to ascend heaven or rise 
higher up; O vicious-minded one! I shall dissever your head 
to-day, a master of vicious illusions (as you are), with my 
thunder-bolts having a hundred heads, exert with all your 
. kinsmen.” 

VALI said:—To those persons who urged on by Kala 
stand in the encounter, glory, victory, defeat and death 
gradually happen. The wise behold this universe as guided by 
K&la and they (therefore) neither grieve nor are elated with 
joy ; you are all ignorant. We shall pay no need to your 
words cutting to the very quick who consider yourselves as 
“instruments of all these and are worthy of being pitied 
(accordingly). 

THE AUSPICIOUS SUKA said :—Having thus chastised the 
king of celestials the repressor of heroes, (Vali) with Naracha, 
outstretched to the very eyes, struck him again who had 
{already been) wounded (with his remonstrations). Although 
thus assailed by his truthful enemy the deity did not tolerate 
his accusations like a goaded elephant. He then immedi- 
ately struck the repressor of enemies with that dreadful 
thunder-bolt ; he then fell down on earth from his convey- 
ance like a mountain with its wings dissevered. Beholding 
his friend thus fallen, Vali’s friend Jambha, despite his friend 
being slain, proceed, to perform a friendly act; then united 
with Sinhavaha and lifting up the mace with great velocity, 
that highly powerful (demon) struck with it Indra and his 


‘40 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


elephant on the joint of the shoulders; being greatly pained 
by the stroke of the club and bewildered, the elephant touched 
the ground with its knees -and attained to great afflictions. 
Thereupon a car drawn by a ten hundred steeds was brought 
by M&tali, and thé king of the celestials, leaving off the 
elephant, ascended the chariot. Thereupon speaking highly 
of the action (of the charicteer) Jambha, the foremost of 
the Danavas, vauntingly struck him in the encounter with a 
burning mace. Resorting to tlie quality of goodness, . Matali 
put up with the dreadful pain; Indra (too) enraged sundered 
Jambha’s head with his thunder-bolt. Hearing of Jambha’s 
destruction from the Rishi Narada, his -kinsmen Namuchi, 
Vala and Paka arrived there speedily and cutting 
Indra to the very quick with harsh . words  over- 
powered him with shafts like clouds overpowering a moun- 
tain with shower. The light-handed Vala, with arrows, 
simultaneously assailed the ten hundred steeds of Indra; 
Paka (assailed) with two arrows Ma&tali and the chariot ; with 
simutaneous setting and discharging both of them were 
separately wounded up and down—and this appeared won- 
drous in the battle-field. “With fifteen gold feathered huge * 
arrows Namuchi pierced (Indra) and began to ethit dreadful 
roars in the battle-field like watery clouds. Like. clouds 
covering the sun in the rainy season the Asuras with their 
arrows covered Indra with his car and charioteer. Not be- 
holding him and considering themselves without a leader (iri 
the hands) of the hostile army, like merchants with their 
boat broken in the midst of an ocean, the celestials with their 
followers being bewildered began to cry aloud. Then issu- 
‘ing out with his flag, chariot, horses and charioteer from the 
cage of arrows Indra appeared like the sun lighting up the 
sky, quarters and the earth with his effulgence on the des- 
truction of darkness; and beholding his soldiers assailed by 
the enemies in the battle, the wielder of the thunder-bolt 
uplipted it in anger for the destruction of his foes ; and he 


a 


: _SRIMADBHAGABATAM, 4f 
suddenly, O king| therewith sundered the heads of Vala and 
Paka and created terror in the minds of their kinsmen who saw 
it. Beholding their destruction and being stricken with.grief, 
malice and anger, Namuchi, bent upon the destructioa of Indra, 
‘O king! put forth a mighty exertion. Taking up his iron 
mace having bells and adorned with gold, he, enraged, began 
to exclaim. “Oh! thou art slain” and discharged it at the king 
of the celestials, roaring like a lion; Indra (too) with his 
atrows sundered it into a thousand pieces, rising up into 
the sky with great velocity; and then the king of the 
celestials stricken with anger, O king! struck him on the 
shoulders with his thunder-bolt, for cutting his head off. 
The thunder-bolt,which was despatched and discharged by 
the might of the king of the celestials, could not cut his skin 
(even). It was a great wonder that, what sundered the highly 
powerful (Asura) Vitra, was*baffled by the skin of Namuchi’s 
neck. Indra feared him from avhom the thunder-bolt used 
to come back unsuccessful (and he thought) “How this 
bewilderment of creatures has been brought about by Des- 
tiny? ” (The thunder-bolt) by which, in the days of yore 
on the occasion of-the destruction of creatures, I sundered 
the wings of: the mountains, who by their own weight and 
wings used to fall down on earth, by which the mighty 
Vitra powerful by virtue of his ascetic observance, was slain 
as well as othcr powerful (Asuras) whose skins had not been 
cut by all the weapons—that (thunder-bolt) discharged by me, 
has been baffled on this Asura. Alas! I shall not take up 
this thunder-bolt useless like a stick. Oh! useless is also the 
energy of Brahma,” To Indra thus bewailing, the disem- 
bodied voice said :—‘This Danava is not capable of being 
slain by a dry or wet object. This boon was conferred upon 
him by me, that death (would not proceed) from wet or dry 
object; do thou think of any other expedient, O Maghavat!” 
-Hearing those words of the god, Maghavat, with a concen- 
trated mind, thought and considered a foam as partaking of 

6 


42 SRIMADBHAGABATFAM. 


the both. He then cut off Namuchi’s head with that, neither 
dry nor wet. Engarlanding the king of the celestials, the 
sages began to chant his glories; the two leading Gandhar- 
-vas, Visblidvasi’ and Paravasu began to sing; the celestial 
bugles were sounded atid the dancing girts began-to dance 
with delight. Like a lion killing a deer, Vayu, Agni and other 
deities began to slay the minor Asuras who challenged them 
respectively. O king! beholding the annihitation of the 
Dandvas and despatched by. Brabma, the Rishi Narada pre- 
vented the celestials. 

THE AUSsvICIOUS NARADA said :—~Resorting to the arms 

of Narayana you have all obtained nectar and been endowed 
with all prosperity ; do yé desist from dissension. 
‘ THE auspicious SuKA said :—Honoring the sage’s words 
and controlling their anger’ they all, having théir glories 
hymned by their followers, repaired to the celestial region ; 
and by the command of (Narada) those who remained in the 
battle-field, taking the distressed Vali with them, went to the 
mount where the sun sets. Usanas, by virtue of his ewn 
knowledge of Sanjivant (reviving dead men) brought them 
all back into life whose bodies in the battle-field were not 
entirely spoiled and who had their heads or necks. Being 
touched by Usanas, Vali regained his senses and memory 
and he, well-versed in the real truth of things, was not de- 
jected though he was defeated. 


ay ny 
CHAPTER XII. 


Te AusPICious SuKA said :—Hearing that Hari had, 
enchanted the Danavas in the form of a damsel and made 
the celestials drink of nectar, the Divine Siva, having the 
bull for his emblem, along with all the ghosts and the goddess 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 43 


went on the back of his bull for seeing where the slayer 
of Madhu was. Having been welcomed with honor by the . 
Divine Lord and seated at ease, Bhava, in the company of 
Umi, returning the welcome and. smiling said to Hari: 
“Q god of gods! O thou spreading over the universe! O 
thou identical with the universe! O lord of the universe! 
thou art the cause of all objects and therefore art the God 
and the Soul. Thou art that eternal Brahman in the form 
of intellect from whom the beginning, the middle and the 
end of the universe proceed but which do not belong to 
his form, who: art “this,” “that” “I” and who art both 
the .enjoyer and the object enjoyed. The sages, wishing 
well-being, having no hope and renouncing association both 
in this world and the next, adore thine lotus-feet. Thou art 
the perfect Brahman, bliss devoid of qualities and grief, 
art all joy, art above the influence of all changes; save thee, 
there exists nothing and thou art different from all; thou 
art the cause of the creation, preservation and destruction 
of the universe and thou art the lord of all creatures; 
though thou dost not wait (for any thing still thou dost) 
wait for thine votaries.- Thou art identical with the existent 
and non-existent ; as there is no difference of object between 
gold and the ornaments made of gold, the ignorant attri- 
bute difference to thee, but thou art without any designation ; 
the qualities bring about difference in thee (in reality thou 
hast none.) Some regard thee as Brahman, some regard 
thee as Dharma (religion), some consider thee as the 
Purusha above Prakriti and Purusha, some designate thee 
as the excellent male being endued with new energy, and 
others call thee the Great Purusha independent in Himself. 
Neither myself, Brahma nor Marichi and others created by 
the quality of goodness, having ouc minds possessed by 
thine illusive energy, O lord! can understand truly this 
thine creation how can Daityas and mortals whose origia 
and conduct proceed from the qualities of darkness and 


44 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


ignorance? Thou art cognizant of the creation, preserva- 
tion and destructign of the universe, the exertions of all 
creatures, the ties of the world as well as emancipation ; 
as the wind extends over the mobile and immobile creation 
and the etherial region, so thou art manifest all over, as the 
soul and the intellect. Ihave seen all thine incarnations 
while sporting with thine qualities and I wish to behold 
that female form which ‘thou didst assume, by which the 
Daityas were- bewildered the celestials drank the nectar; we 
have come here for seeing this and have got a great curiosity 
for this.” 

THe AusPicious SUKA said :—Being thus eulogised by 
the holder of macé the Divine Vishnu, smiling replied unto 
Girisha in words pregnant with deep significance, saying ;— 
The vessel containing nectar having passed (into the 
hands of the Asuras) [ assumed the female forin for deceiving 
the Daityas, for in this I perceived ‘the’ accomplishment of 
the object of the celestials. O foremost of the celestials | 
I shall now show this to thee, who art desirous of seeing 
this, which is highly honored by them, who have desires in 
them and from which originate desires.” 

THE AUSPICIOUS SUKA said:—While saying this the 
Divine Lord disappeared therefrom, casting -his looks on 
all sides; Bhava with Uma waited there. Thereupon he 
saw, in the garden abounding in variagated flowers and 
trees covered with new leaves, a beautiful female having 
her waist clothed with atbrilliant silken raiment and Mekhala 
and playing with a Kanduka. The ball falling and 
rising up her breast and beautiful bracelet were so shaken 
that it appeared, that she, broken down in the middle by the 
héavy weight thereof, was moving hither and thither, her 
tender feet resembling corals. The greatly fickle Kanduka 
moving on all sides, the pupils of her expansive and beautiful’ 
eyes, appeared to have been stricken with anxiety ; the 
: Kundalas appeared graceful by the beauty of the ears ; and 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 45 


the countenance appeared highly beautiful on account of the 
Kundalas and black hair arranged in braids.- Holding by 
the left hand the loosened raiment and locks and having 
driven the Kundadas by her right hand, she, it seemed, was 
enchanting the universe with her own illusory powers. Be- 
holding her and stricken with her glances accompained with 
sidelong smiles proceeding from her bashfulness while playing 
with the Kunxduka and being beside himself by looking at her 
and being looked at the Deity could not perceive himself, Uma 
who was near him, and his own followers. Once the Kanduka 
slipped off her hands and fell ata distance, and while she 
ran after it, the raiment upon her waist was lifted up by the 
wind and the Diety fixed this eyes upon it. Beholding that 
graceful female, having beautiful limbs and worthy of being 
seen, who was casting her side-long looks upon him, he felt 
attachment towards her. Having his good sense pilfered by 
her and been overpowered by: her lustful gestures he, al- 
though seen by Bhavani, casting off bashfulness came near her. 
She was without any raiment and beholding him approach, 
became greatly ashamed ; and smiling, she hid herself behind 
a tree and did not stand there. Having desire excited in 
him and been brought under the control of the God of love, 
the Divine Bhava followed her like an elephant following a 
she-elephant. Running after her speedily, holding that 
female who was unwilling by her locks, he embraced her by 
his arms. Being embraced by the Lord like untoa she-elephant 
by an elephant, she ran hither and thither and all her hair 
were dishevelled (accordingly), Then having released herself 
from the limbs of that foremost of the celestials, that female 
of a spacious’ waist creatéd by’ the illusive energy of the 
Diety, ran away. Being overpgwered by his enemy Kama, 
Rudra followed her footsteps, the wondrous creation of 
Vishnu. Hara neared all the Rishis who lived in rivers, 
lakes, on mountains, in forest, gardens and other places ; then 
having perceived that he was overpowered by the, illusive 


‘ 


46 : SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


energy of the Diety he desisted therefrom. Thereupon re- 
membering the glory of the soul of the universe whose prowess 
is beyond conception, he did not consider it wondrous; then 
beholding him untouched by remorse and shame, the slayer 
of Madhu, assuming his own male form and greatly delighted 
said. . 7 

THE LORD said :—O foremost of the celestials, fortunate 
it is that thou hast regained thy true nature although enchan- 
ted by my illusive energy in the form of a female; thou dost 
exist in thy self; who, else, being once attached, can go beyond 
the illusive energy which creates (wonderful) ideas and which 
is hard to be crossed over by persons of unripe understand- 
ing. This illusive energy, identical with qualites, being 
united with me under the influence of time shall not over- 
power thee (in future). 

THe AusPicious SUKA said :—O king, having thus been 
honoured by the Diety having the mystic mark of Saivatsa, 
(Bhava) welcoming and circumambulating him, repaired along 
with his followers to his own region. Then, O descendant of 
of Bharata, in sweet words the Divine Bhava said to 
Bhavani, who was a portion of his own self, a form of the 
illusive energy and was respected by all the leading asce- 

’ tics :— Dost thou behold the illusive.energy of the un- 
born, the Great Diety and the great Purusha ; I am the Lord 
of Kalas, I have been over-powered by it what to speak of 
those persons who are not independent ? He is the ancient 

‘. Purusha in whom neither time nor destiny.can enter and of 
whom thou didst ask me when I desisted from my devout 
penances after a thousand years.” 

THE auspicious SUKA: said :—O my child, I have thus 
related unto thee, the prowess of the Divine master of Sanga- 
bow who held on his back the huge mountaia Mandara at 
the time of the churning of the ocean. Whoever shall 
teverentially chant or listen to his glories shall never haye his 
energies dissipated—for the chanting of the glories of the 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 47 


Illustrious Lord destroys all worldly miseries. [ bow unto 
him, who, having enchanted the Asuras in the form of a 
female, made the immortals seeking his refuge drink of the 
nectar produced by the churning of the ocean, whose feet 
are beyond the perception of the wicked and are attainable 
only by meditation and who fulfills the desires of his 
votaries, 


CHAPTER XIII, 


(eee an tonieaeeeane OD 


. (ee auspicious SuKA said :—Hear, I shall give an 
account of the progeny of the seventh Manu, who is still 
living, the sun of Vivaswata known under the name of 
Srahdha-deva; O slayer of enemies! Ikshwaku, Nabhaga, 
Dhrista, Sharyati, Narishwanta, Nabhaga, Dashta, Varuna, 
Prishadra and Vashuman; these ten are the offspring of the 
Manu Vaivasvata. O king, in this Mawantara, the deties 
were Aditya, Vasu, Rudra, Viswadeva, Marudganas, the two 
Aswinis and Ribhu and Indra was the king of all the deities ; 
_ the seven rishis were Kashyapa, Atri, Vashistha, Vishwamitra, 
Gotama, Jamadagni, and Varadvaja. In this the Divine Vish- 
ne was bora of Aditi by Kashyapa; and being born amongst 
the Adityas he assumed the form of a dwarf. The seven 
Manwantaras have been briefly described unto thee by me. 
I shall relate afterwards the future Manwantara in which 
Vishnu will incarnate himself, Vivaswia had two wives-——both 
of them were daughters of Visvakarman and were named 
Chaya and Sanga of whom I spoke before; some say he 


48 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


had a third wife named Badava, but (I think) Sanga was 
Badava; she had three children, Yama, Yami and Shra- 
dhadeva; hear, I shall describe the progeny of Chaya. (She 
had one son) Savarni and one daughter Tapti who was the 
wife of Sambarana and the third was Shani; the two sons of 
Badava were the two Ashwinis; when the eighth period of 
Manu shall set in, Savarni shall be the Manu ; Nirmoka, Viro- 
jaskha and others shall be his progeny ; Sutapas, Virajas, 
Amrita Peabha and others shall be deities and Virochana’s 
son Vali shall be their king ; conferring upon Visnu the 
entire world, who begged of him land to cover three foot- 
_ steps, and renouncing the station of Indra, he shall attain to 
to the accomplishment of ascetic observance. The Divine 
Lord delightedly bound him and placed him again in the 
region underneath the earth ; and he now lives there superior 
even to the celestial region, like the King of heaven. Galva 
Diptiman, Parasharama, Ashvathama, Kripa, Rishwasringa, 
our sire, the Divine Vadrayana, shall be the seven Rishis, 
who, O King, are now living in their respective hermi- 
tages in divine communion. Being born of ° Sarasvati by 
Devagulya the Lord shall be (known as) Sarvabhowma and 
stealing a piece of land from Purandara shall confer it upon 
Vali. The ninth Manu Daksha Savarin shall be born of, 
Varuna. Bhutketu, Diptaketu and others shall be his pro- 
geny; Para, Marichigarva and others shall be the deities ; 
Advata their king and Dijutman and others shall be the 
seven Rishis. Being born of Amvudhara by Ayusloman, 
the Divine Lord shall be known as Rishabha by whom Ad- 
vata shall be made to enjoy the prosperous three worlds. 

The tenth Manu Brahmasavarni shall be the son of Upash- 
loka ; Bhurisena and others shall be his progeny ; Havisvan 
and others shall be the Brahmanas. Havishman, Sukrita, 
Satya, Jaya Murti and others shall be the Rishis,; Suvasan, 
Abirudha and others shall be the deities and Shambhu their 
lord. Having a portion of Him born of Visuchi by Vishwas- 


SRIMADBHAGABA TAM. 49 


rik as Vishwaksena the Divine Lord shall contract friend- 
ship with Shambhu, The eleventh Manu Dharmasavarni 
shall have ten children beginning with Satyadharma; Vihan- 
gama, Kalagama, Nirvanaruchi and others shall be the deities; 
Vaidhrita shall be their king; Aruna and others shall be the 
Rishis; and the Divine Hari, with one portion being born of 
Vaidhrita by Aryaka, shall be known as his son Dharmasetu ; 
and that portion shall uphold the three worlds. O king 
Rudrasavarni shall be the twelfth Manu and Devav4n, 
Upadeva and Deva Shrisht& and others his progeny; Harita 
and others shall be thé deities and Gandhadhdma the king; 
Tapomurti, Tapaswi, Agnidhra and others shall be the 
Risbis. And a portion of Hari being begotten by the 
Brahmana Satyasaha on his spouse Sunrita shall be cele- 
brated by the name of Sudham& and for him that period 
shall be well known. The self-controlled Devasavarni is 
the future thirteenth Manu; Chitrasena and others shall be 
the deities, Divampati the king and Nirmoka, Tatwadarshi 
and others the Rishis: (And thén) a portion of Hari shall 
be begotten on Vrihati as the son of Divahotra known as 
Yogeswara who shall perform the work of Divampati. Indra 
Savarni shall then be the fourteenth Manu; Urugambhira 
Bradhna and others shall be the progeny; Pavitrachakshusa 
and others shall be deities; Suchi, their king, and Agnivaha, 
Suchi, Sadha, Magadha and others shall be the ascetics. 
O great king, being born of Vinata Hari shall be the son of 
Satrayana and being known as Vrihadvana shall spread his 
actions. Oking, I have thus described unto thee the fourteen 
Manwantaras, past, present and future. These fourteen 
shall extend over a period of a thousand Yuga. 


CHAPTER XIV. 


i ipe KING said :—Do thou tell me, O great Rishi, how, 
by whom and in what work all these Manus were engaged 
in different Manwantaras, 

THE AUSPICIOUS SUKA said 0 king, all the Manus, 
their progeny, the Rishis, the Indras, and all the celestials 
are all commanded by the Purusha. Being engaged by 
sacrifices, the forms of the Purusha, O king, all the Manus, 
perform the work of the world. By virtue of their asceticism 
the Rishis observed the destruction of Srutis at the end of 
the fourth Yuga from: which the eternal religion again 
sprouted. Thereupon, being commanded by Hati, the 
Manus, O king, being self-controlled, instituted, in their res- 
pective periods on earth, the four-footed religion. The sons, 
of Manus, generation after generation till the end of the 
Manwantaras, observed it. And along .with them. who are 
endowed withthe faculty of enjoying as wellasthe duties, 
partaking of sacrifice, Indra,-enjoying the prosperity of the 
three worlds conferred upon him by the Lord, governs the 
three worlds and gives showers profusely inthe world. Assum- 
ing the form of a Siddha Hari gives instructions in knowledge 
in every Yuga, instructions in action in the shape of the Rishi, 
and in Yoga in the form of the Lord of sacrifice (as Datatreya 
and others). In the form of the Patriarch he creates creatures; 
in the form of the king he slays the robbers and in the shape 
of the Death destroys the universe, his qualities taking differ- 
ent forms. He is eulogised by people with various scriptures, 
who, having their souls bewildered by his illusion in the 
shape of name, cannot see him. Thus the extent of Kalpas. 
and of minor KaJpas is described in which those conversant 
with Puranas place the fourteen Manwantaras. : 


CHAPTER XV. 


r : 

le HE KING said :—Why did Hari, the lord of creatures, 
beg of Vali, like a.poor man, ground covering three foot- 
steps? And why did he obtaining it bind him? I wish to 
know all this; I have great curiosity in it—for wonderful is 
the beggins of the Perfect Lord as well as the binding of 
the innocent (Vali). * 

THE Ausricious SUKA said :--O king, being defeated 
and deprived of his life by Indra he was revived by Vrigu; 
thereupon becoming a disciple and conferring upon him all the 
tiches the high-minded Vali adored all the descendants of 
Vrigu. Being pleased with him the high-minded Brahmanas, 
the descendants of Vrigu, having sprinkled him who was 
desirous of conquering the heaven, made him perform the 
sacrifice of Viswajit. When a proper oblation of Havi was 

Offered there arose immediately a golden chariot with several 
yellow steeds like those of Indra and one pennon having the 
emblem of a lion ; as well as a celestial bow having a golden 
frame, two quivers filled with un-ending arrows and a celes- 
tial armour; his grandfather conferred upon him a garland 
of unwithered flowers and Sakra a conch. Thereupon being 

_thus supplied by them, who also performed a benedictory 
ceremony, with implements of warfare he bowed unto the 
Brahmanas ; and then having circumambulated Prahlada he 
bowed unto him (also), Then having ascended the celestial 
car conferred upon him by Vrigu the mighty car- 
warrior wore a beautiful garland and put his armour on; 
and then taking-up his bow and dagger placed the quiver 
(on his ‘back). ‘Having his arms adorned with golden 
bangles and ears adorned with two Makara shaped ‘ear-rings 
he ascended his cat and appeared like fire. Thereupon sur- 


« 


142834 


52 : RIMADBHAGABATAM. 


rounded by the leading Daityas together with their respective 
armies equal to him in strength and wealth who were as 
if with their looks drinking up the sky and quarters, Vali, 
commanding his huge demonaic army, proceeded to the 
prosperous city of Indra as if shaking the heaven and earth. 
(The city) was adorned with charming forests and gardens 
such as Nandana and others which were resonant with the 
music of birds and sweet notes of the maddened black-bees, 
and the branches of the immortal treés whereof were bent 
down with the weight of fruits and flowers. In the tanks 
there three celestial damsels were sporting and the lotuses 
thereof were agitated by the swans, Sarasas, Chakrabakas, 
Karandavas and others aquatic birds. ‘It was girt on all 
sides with the etherial Ganges forming its rampart as if, arid 
with high walls on which were arranged all the fields of 
battle. It was built, by Viswakarman ; the doors were 
made of gold, gates of crystal and high ways were well- 
arranged. It was filled with sitting places, courtyards and 
bye-lanes and was ‘always covered with an Ajuta of chariots ; 
and the crossings of the four streets were adorned with. 
altars made of jewels and Vaidurjas. And there were beautiful 
‘ females whose beauty and grace were everlasting, who were 
all ever youthful, whose raiments were clean and who also 
shone like the flames of burning fire. And there, wind 
carrying the fragrance of sweet scented garlands dropt, 
down fromthe hairs of the celestial females, was travel- | 
ling in various roads. And the high-ways, frequented by 
Asuras, were filled with smokes, with the perfume of. 
Agura: issuing out of the golden windows. The city was 
filled with the tops of the conveyances which were 
adorned with awnings set with pearls, golden flags, crested 
with jewels and various other pennons ; it was resonant with. 
notes of peacocks, pigeons and black bees and rendered aus-, 
picious by the sweet notes of the females of the charioteers, 
Jt appeared graceful with the sound uf Mridanga, conch, drum 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. | 53 


and bugle as well as that of Vina, Muruja, and flute set in time 

and in accompaniment with the music and dancing of the Gan- 

dharvas; and with its effulgence it seemed to have vanquish- 

ed the presiding deity of lustre. The impious, wicked, cruel, 

cunning, proud, and lustful and avaricious cannot enter there ; 

only those, who are divorced from all these, can enter 

there. The commander (Vali) made encampments all over 

outside, the city and blew the conch conferred upon him 

by his preceptor striking terror into the hearts of the celes-. 
tial damsels. Being informed of the great energy -of Vali 

Indra, accompanied by all the celestials, said to th® pre- 
ceptor :—“ O thon endued with spiritual wealth, we behold 

again the energy of eur former enemy Vali; me-thinks, we 
shall not be able to bear it; why has he been filled with 

such energy? Forsooth, none shall, by any means,’ be able 

to thwart it, for he seems to drink the universe with his 
mouth, lick the ten quarters with his tongue and burn the 
quarters with his eyes ; he has risen up like the fire of dis- 
solution, Tell us the cause of our enemy growing thus 
irrepressible, of his strength, bravery, prowess and energy 
from which (proceeds) his endeavour.” 

THE PRECEPTOR said.:—“O Maghavan, I know the cause 
of the advancement of your enemy; he is (their disciple) 
and has been endued with energy by the descendants of 
Vrigu conversant with the knowledge of Brahma. Save 
the Lord Hari, neither thyself nor any one equal to thee 
shall be able to vanquish the powerful Vali. Who shall 
be able to discomfit him who has been endued with the 
energy of Brahman? None shall be able to stand before him 
as people cannot stand before Kritanta. Do ye therefore 
renouncing heaven live in disguise till the hour of the des- 
truction of (your enemy). He has been gradually rendered 
powerful by the energy of the Brahmanas; by insulting, 
them, you shall’ be consumed along with your kinsmen.” 
Being thus advised by the far-seeing preceptor, the celestials 


54 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


assuming forms at will, disappeared renouncing Swarga 
(beaven); and the celestials disappearing, Virochana’s son, 
reigning in the city of Indra, brought three worlds under 
subjection. And the descendants of Vrigu, fond of their 
disciples, made their world-conquering disciple perform 
hundred horse sacrifices (for attaining to the station of Indra) ; 
by the influence of which he, spreading his fame known 
all over the three worlds on all sides, shone like the 
moon surrounded by stars. And considering himself blessed 
he enjoyed the prosperity acquired through the Brah- 
man&s. . ‘ 


CHAPTER XVI. 


es 


Tis AUSPICIOUS SUKA said:—Her children thus dis- 
appearing and the Daityas pilfering the heaven, the mother 
of the deities, Diti, bewailed like one having no lord. One 
day having desisted from his meditation Kasyapa, endued 
with spiritual wealth, repaired tq his-hermitage shorn; of 
mirth and merriment. O foremost of Kurus! being. wel, 
comed and taking his seat, he duly asked his wife of pale 
countenance, saying :— O fair one! has any misfortune, of 
late, overtaken the Brahmanas of this earth? or piety or man- 
kind who are subject to the influence of Death? O thou living 
tm the house! does Dharma, Artha or Kama fare well in 
thy house ? Do persons not devoted to yoga, attain to it? 
Has any guest coming gone back not received with welcome. 
by thee who art ever devoted to thy kinsmen? The houses, 
from which the guests go back not being received even with 
water, are like the dens of jackals. O Chaste one! stricken 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. &5 


with anxiety as thou wert during my absence didst thou ever 
forget to offer oblation of Havi into fire? The Brahmanas and 
the fire constitute the mouth of Vishnu identical with all 
deities, by worshipping whom all the householders attain to 
the regions where they obtain the gratification of all their 
desires. O high-minded lady i is it all well with thy sons? 
I perceive from signs that thy mind is not at ease.” 

THE AuspPicious ApITI said :—O Brahman, it is all well 
with cows, Brahmanas and Dharma as well as with the house, 
O householder, which is the most excellent birth place of 
threefold objects. O Brahman, fire, guests, servants, beggars 
aud others, who expect food, are all gratified with mine 
meditation of thee who art gifted with six sorts of wealth. 
O lord, why should not my heart-felt desire be satisfied since 
thou art the protector of my children and dost give vent to 
such pious words O son of -Marichi, originating from thy 
body or mind all creatures are enveloped with the qualities 
of goodness, darkness or ignorance; though thou hast, O 
lord, equal attachment towards all the celestials still Mahes- 
wara is attached to his votaries (particularly) ; Iadore thee, 
do thou think of my well-being, O thou of firm vows ; do. 
thou, O lord, protect us who have been deprived of our 
prosperity and position by the children of my rival. I have 
been exiled by my enemies anid am sunk in the ocean of | 
calamteties; O sage, O accomplisher of well-being, do thou 
by thy understanding, do them the good, by which my off- 
spring may regain theit wealth, fame, prosperity and position 
of which they had been robbed by the powerful Danavas. 

THE Auspicious SUKA said:—Having been thus wel- 
comed by Aditi, he, as if in surprise, said: — Oh! mighty is 
the illusive enérgy of Vishnu; this universe is bound by 
affection ; whére is that elemental body having no soul ? and 
where is that soul beyond Prakriti? who are the husband 
and gon? delusion is the root of all these. Do thou worship 
the world’s ‘preceptor Vasudeva, the divine Janardana, the 


56 SRIMADBHAGABATAM?> 


Prime Purusha ‘living in the ‘hearts of all creatures. Hari, 
kind unto the poor, shall grant all thine’ desires ; the adora- 
tion of the Divine lord only always leads: to success and 
nothing else—this even is my conviction,” ! 

THE auspicious Apriti said :—“ By what méthed: -O 
Brahman, shall I worship the preceptor of the world, | for 
which he, of truthful determination, shall grant my desires, 
O foremost of the twice-born, do thou instruct me in that 
mode of worship by which he may soon be propitiated- unto 
me who am being exhausted with my offspring. 

KasyApa said :—‘ The Divine lotus-born-: deity was 
accosted by me regarding. this; I shall communicate unto 
thee the vow of the propitiation of Keshava which he told 
me. In the light half month’ of Phalguna, you should go’ 
through the penance of living on water and with devotion’ 
should worship the lotus-eyed deity. Jf available, having 
pasted thy body with the earth thrown up by a boar.thou 
shouldst bathe in the stream water on the day of Amavasya 
and should recite this Mantra.: “O goddess, desirous of 
having space thou wert upraised from Ras&tala by ate 
Prime boar; I ‘bow unto thee, do thou remove: my sin.” 

_ Thereupon having duly gone through your daily rites. 
every day you should, with a controlled mind, adore either 
an image, an altar, the sun, the water, fire or your’ preceptor. 
(Reciting) ,“ Salutation unto thee who art Great. Purusha, 
the abode of all creatures and the witness of all. Salutation 
unto the invisible, subtle, Great Purusha cognisant of twenty- 
four Tatwas and the propounder of the Sankya yoga. 
Salutation unto (Vishnu) in the form of sacrifice, the ex- 
tender of the fruits of sacrifice, who has two heads, three 
eyes, four horns,. seven arms and who is the soul of the 
three-fold learning. Salutation unto Shiva and Rudra and 
the upholder of energy; salutation.unto the lord ‘of all 
learnings and the lord of creatures. Salutation unto 
Hiranyagarbha, who is identical with sacrifice and universe, 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 57° 


salutation unto thee who hast the wealth of yoga for thy body 
and who art the root of yoga; salutation unto thee who 
art the Prime Deity, the witness of all; Narayana, Rishi Nara, 
and Hari. Salutation unto thee whose body is yellow like 
emerald and who hast obtained Sree; salutation unto thee 
who art Kesava and who hast yellow raiment; O most 
exalted one! O foremost of the tconferrer of boons, thou 


_art the giver of all boons unto persons, so the sages, for 


theic well-being, seek the dust of thine feet. May that 
Divine Lord be propitiated with me whom the. celestials 
and Sree serve, being desirous of ‘the fragrance of his lotus- 
like feet.” Thus invoking Hrishikesha with these Mantras 
and welcoming reverentially Him with water to wash His 
feet you should adore Him; then worshippiag Him with 
sweet scented garlands you should sprinkle the Lord with 
milk ; then offering Lim, cloth, ornaments, sacred thread, water 
o wash feet, perfumeries and incense you should worship 

im with a Mantra consisting of twelve letters. O chaste 
lady, if you have wealth you should offer Pay&sa as food 
and milk with Shalirice. Then giving food with clarified 
butter and sugar you should perform Homa with the primary 
Mantra; then you should make the votaries of the Divine 
Lord pertake of these offerings and afterwards you should 
eat. Adoring him with water to rinse mouth you should offer 
betel and then reciting the primary Mantra for a hundred 
and eighteen times, you should, in the above mentioned 
way and various other means, chant the glories of the Lord. 
Thereupon circumambulating him you should bow touching 
the ground with your head and then taking the remnant 
you should cast it off, Then you should with Payasa feed 
not less than two Bralmanas and afterwards with their, per- 
mission you should pertake of it yourself along with your 
friends, Thereupon on that night you should follow the rites 
of a Brahmacharin, and then, at the break of: day, on the first 
morning you should bathe, cleanse yourself and remain with 

3 


58 SRIMAODBHAGABATAM. 


a subdued mind.- Then sprinkling Him with milk you should 
worship till the end of your vow; living on. milk and being 
honoured for worshipping Vishnu you should. continue your 
vow and as before offer oblation into fire and feed the Brah- 
manas ; thus for twelve days, day and night, you should 
perform the vow of milk; beginning from Pratipad to 
Trayodoshi of the light half month you should worship Hari 
with Homa, adoration and the feeding of the Brahmanas, 
During those days you should lie down on earth, bathe 
three times and give up bad conversation and rich: food. 
Being harmless towards all creatures, devoted to Vasu- 
deva, you should on the day of Trayodashi, perform the 
ablution of the Divine Vishnu, .having performed .Pancha- 
mrita duly through those who are conversant with cere- 
monials laid down in Shastras; then making charz of milk 
you should dedicate it to Vishnu, and then with a controlled 
mind adofe the Purusha with (the abovementioned) Mantraé 
You should make a present of such proper offerings that 
the Great Purusha may be propitiated ; thereupon you should 
‘bring about the satisfaction of the learned preceptors and 
priests withthe presents of clothes, ornaments ‘and kine, 
O thou of pure smiles, the adoration of Hari consists in 
accomplishing the satisfaction of all these, so you should 
according to your might, treat all of them as well as other 
Brahmanas who will come thereto sweet dishes: then you 
should confer proper Dakshinas on the preceptors and Rit- 
wwijas; in the end with food and others things you should, 
satisfy all others that will be assembled there ; knowing that 
‘Vishnu is propitiated, when the poor,.the blind and the miser 
are fed you should (after all) eat with your friends; with danc- 
ing singing, rehearsal of glories and benedictory saying and 
also with the recounting of his themes you should please 
the Lord every day. ‘his is the most excellent adoration 
ofthe Purusha called Payavrate ; this was communicated 
unto me by ‘the grandfather andI gladly recount-it unte 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM: tg 


thee; O large-minded damsel, following properly ‘this vow 
you should adore thereby the eternal and the worshipful, 
Divine Lord. This is the all sacrifice, this is the all vow, 
this is the essence of devout penance, this is Great and this 
constitutes the satisfaction of the Lord ; that by which Adhok.- 
shaja is propitiated is the ordinance, excellent self-morti- 
fication, devout penance, gift, vow and sacrifice ; O auspi- 
cious dame, with reverencé and being self-controlled, do 
thou go through this penance being pleased whereby the 
Divine Lord shall confer upon thee thine desired-for objects. 


CHAPTER XVII. 
omen eeeeeend 


Tice AUSPICIOUS SUKA said —Being thus instructed by 
-her husband Kacyapa, Aditi, O king, diligently entered upon 
the observance of this vow extending over twelve ‘days. 
And making her intellect her driver, she restrained those 
vicious horses, her senses, and concentrated.her whole mind 
and thought on the one Great Male, even the Lord. Ard 
centering her entire thought on the reverend Vasudeva, soul 
of all that is, she observed the Payavrata. Thereat, my 
child; there appeared before her the mighty primzval male, 
wearing a yellow attire, having four arms, and--bearing the 
Conch, the Discus, and the Mace. On beholding him with 
her very eyes, she, wildered with ecstacy, suddenly, started 
to her feet, and like a rod bowed cher person dawn to the 
earth. Having risen up, she joined-her hands; but“with her 
‘eyes flooded with tears could not hymn him; and. remained 
‘silent ; while her body was brimming over with. rapture, and 


N 


60 SRIMADBHAGABATAM, 


while in consequence of having attained a sight .of him, her 
person shook with mere joy, O glory of the Kuru race ; then, 
fixing her gaze. on that lord of sacrifice and the creator 
of the world, Hari, husband of Ram4, and seeming to drink 
him with her eyes, the noble Aditi began to hymn him in 
words thrilling with emotion. And the auspicious Aditi 
said: “O lord of sacrific, O Presiding Presence of rites, O 
thou that never fallest off, O thou that hast holy spots for 
thy feet, and holy spots constitute whose celebrity; whose 
name is even Sravanamangala, O lord, O primaval one, O 
Mighty being, since thou art the savior of the distressed, and 
since thy appearance removeth the iniquities of those that 
seek thee, do thou compass our welfare. I salute thee, O 
Hari, who art the universe, and the cause as’ well of the 
creation, sustention, and dissolution of the universe; who, 
of thine own accord dost assume the attributes of the Illusory 
energy; who yet art self-poised; and destroyest the dark-. 
ness of thy spirit by thy complete comprehension developing 
eternally. By gratifying thee one attains the eye of 
Brahma himself, a desirable person, good fortune un- 
parelleled in heaven, on earth, or in the nether. sphere, all 
‘the benefits of the Yoga, the three kinds of good and abso- 
lute knowledge, O Infinite one, what a straw is such a thing 
as victory over a foe.” 

THE AUSPICIOUS SUKA said:-—O king, on being thus praised 
by Aditi, that lotus-eyed mighty being, who is located in the 
heart of every creature, thus addressed her, O Bharata. And 
the auspicious one spoke: “O mother of the gods, by 
me hath been known the desire thou: hast long indulged 
concerning thy sons deprived of their good fortune by their 
enemies, and (ultimately) driven out from their native re-" 
gion. Thou wishest to dwell with thy sons, after they have 
reaped mattial glory by defeating the irrepressible Danavas 
in battle ; and thou also wouldst behold the wives of the 
enemies of thy children waiting and lamenting, after those . 


SRIMADBRAGABATAM, 61 


foes have been slain in “Battle. by thy sons headed by 
Indra. - And thou wouldst’ behold thine offspring prosperous 
and sporting in the celestial regions with their reuown’ and 
good fortune reclaimed. But in my opinion, O noble lady, 
the leaders of the Asura forces cannot at present be brought 
down; for they are protected by the foremost Vipras, 
auspicious to them. In such case, prowess can hardly 
compass (our) desire. Still, O noble lady, I ponder over ‘the 
means ‘of the foe, for it is not fit that the fact of thy having 
gratified me by observing the vow shall go for nothing. The. 
measure of recompense must sort with the measure of 
reverence (cherished for me). Having been worshipped by 
“thee with the view of protecting thine offspring, and having 
been hymned by thee with the observance of the Paya- 
vrata I, becoming thy son charged with’ a portion of my own 
energy, will protect thy sons, established in the asceticism 
of M&aricha. Do thou, O gentle one, seek thy lord, ‘the 
sinless Prajapati,—at the same time concieving me as 
centred in him in this wise. 

THE ‘AUSPICIOUS SUKA ‘said :—Having delivered. himself 
thus, the mighty one vanished then and there. Then deem- 
ing herself as having attained the crown of her existence on 
account of her bearing in her the Lord Hari—a piece of good 
luck rare to attain—Aditi, filled with the highest reverence, 
went to her husband. And through spiritual rapture Kagvapa 
of unfailing siyht perceived a portion of Hari entering into 
hitnself. Then even as the wind produceth fire, so, O king 
he (Kacyapa), concentrating his thought, instilled into Aditi 
his. vital fluid treasured up through asceticism extending 
over a great length of time. Then Hiranyagarbha, knowing 
that the eternal omnipotent one lying .in (the womb of) 
Aditi, began to ‘celebrate his praises under the name of 
Guhabya: And ‘the auspicious Brahma said: “O mighty 
Urugaya, O Urukrama, salutation unto thee! salutation unto. 
the Brahmanyedeva, salutation unto Triyuga, salutation 


« 


62 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


unto thée who hast had thy birth in the womb of Prigni, 
unto thee who dost manifest thyself in all the Vedas, who 
art the Ordainer, who holdest the three regions-in ‘thy 
navel, and dwellest above the three regions, unto thee who 
dwellest in the mind of every creature, and pervadest every 
thing. Thou art the beginning, the middle and the end,— 
and thou hast been described as the male fraught with in- 
finite force O Lord ; even asa strong current draws a straw, 
so thou, in the form of Time, drawest this universe (after thee). 
Thou art the origin of all creatures, of the mobile and the 
immobile, and of the Prajapatis also. Even as a boat serves 
as a refuge for a person sinking in water, so thou art the 
refuge of the celestials fallen from the etherial rigions. 


CHAPTER XVIIT. 


ee 


Te AUSPICIOUS SUKA spoke :—On being thus hymned 
by Virinchi extolling his prowess and acts, (Hari) having 
no birth and no death, was born in Aditi, furnished with four 
arms, bearing’ the conch, the mace, the ‘lotus, and the 
‘discus,—with eyes expansive like lotuses,—clad in an -attire 
having a yellow hue. This male had a sable white com- 
plexion, and his grace and Ictus face were lighted. up 
with the ‘lustre .of his ear-rings having the forms .of sharks. 
He bore the Srivatsa mark on his breast, and his diadem, 
zone, and bangles’ were blazing together with his bracclets 
and Angadas. And appearing eminently handsome with a 
graceful garland of wild flowers ringing with the hum 
of ‘the bees,. with Kaustubha; worn on his neck, Hari 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 63. 


removed the gloom of Kacyapa’s house with his own 
radiance. And on his being born, all: the cardinal quarters 
and the watery expenses looked complaccently, all creatures 
were gladdened,-every season was crowned with its proper 
fruits and flowers, joy reigned supreme in heaven,.and the 
sky, andthe earth, and the celestials; and kine, and the 
twice-born ones and mountains. 
The Lord saw the light at an auspicious howe of the first 
of the twelfth day of the light fortnight, Abhijiti being in the 
‘ascendant, and all the stars and planets serving to shed their 
choicest influence on his advent. And on that twellth -day 
the sun was in the mid heavens,—and that date on which 
Lord had his birth goes uyder the name of Vijaya. And then 
there arose mighty sounds of conchs and kettle drums, 
and trumpets, and Mridangas, and Anakas and other ex- 
cellent musical instruments. And delighted Apsaras danced 
and the foremost Gandharbhas raised strains of song, and 
ascestics began to hymn (Uari’s praises); and hosts of 
Siddhas, and Vidyadharas, together with Kimpurashas and 
Kinnaras, and Charanas, Yakshas and Rakshas, and Supamas 
and the best of serpents—headed by the celestials, began to 
sing and dance and extoll his praises, and covered Aditi’s dwel- 
ling with showers of blossoms. Beholding that prime person 
spring from hee womb, Aditi, seized with wonderment, was 
transported with joy; and Prajapati, struck with amaze, 
utterred Jaya to him who had incarnated himself by virtue of 
his yoga maya. Before his beholding parents, Hari: -of 
marvellous deeds like an actor, appeared as the dwarf son of 
a Brahmang in that very body which was instinct with une. 
mainfested consciousness and which mainfested itself with 
brightness, ornaments and weapons. Seeing that Dwarf-son 
of a Brahmana, eminent saints, experiencing the highest joy, 
heaped rewards on Prajapati, and made liim perform the 
(necessary) rites. On the occassion of his investiture with 
the holy thread, the sum himself recited the Solar hymn, while: 


64 SRIMADBHAGABATAM, 


Veihaspati invested him with the Brahma thread and Kacyapa 
put the Zone on him. And the earth gave that master of the 
world a black deer skin, and the lords of woods, the Soma 
staff, his mother a piece of cloth for wear, and heaven ano 
umbrella. And Vedagarbha furnished that one of undecaying 
spirit with a Kamandalu, and the seven Rishis Kuga, and, 
O mighty monarch, Saraswati with a rosary. And after he 
had been invested with the holy thread, the King of the 
Yakhas presented him with a bowl (for alms,) and the chaste 
and mighty Amvika herseif gave him alms. Thus honored 
{by all) the Brahmana’s son, of great work, looked spendid, 
surpassing with his Brahma brightness that assembly 
abounding in Brahmana sages. ,And_ then kindling fire 
with fuel, and spreading Kuca around, the Lord again 
offered oblations to (the god of) fire, after having (duly) 
worshipped him. Then learning that ‘Vali, Attaining great 
power in consequence of having performed (a great many) 
horse-sacrifices, prescribed by the Bhrigus was engaged in 
celebrating a fresh one, he set out for that place, charged 
with absolute power, and bending the earth at every step. 
And at the spot going under the name of Bhrigukachchha, 
on the northern bank of the Narmada certain Ritwijas of 
_ Vali belonging to the Bhrigu race, who were engaged in 
performing that best of sacrifices, saw him approach like 
the sun (riving the sky). And shorn of their lustre by the 
effulgence of the Dwarf, the prests, the sacrificer, and ‘the 
courtiers, (asked themselves in wonder); “ Desirous of be- 
holding the sacrifice, is it the sun that is approaching; or is 
it the god ‘of fire or Sanatkumara”? Being the, subject. of 
various conjectures indulged by the Bhrigus and their dis- 
ciples, the mighty Dwarf entered the compound of that horse 
sacrifice, bearing a staff, an umbrella, and a Kamandalu filled,. 
with water. Seeing the subtle Vipra Dwarf, Hari, wilh the form 
of a dwarf assumed by his energy of illusion,—wearing a zone 
of Maunja (grass), with a deer, skin scarf thrown -(over. his 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 65 


shoulders) after the fashion of the holy thread, the Bhrigus, 
and their disciples, together with the deities of fire, having 
had their brightness beaten back, suddenly stood up and. 
accorded him a respectful reception. And the sacrificer, 
rejoiced on seeing that handsome person whose grace was 
equal to the loveliness of his limbs, offered him a seat; then 
giving his welcome dues, Vali worshipped the feet of the 
wighty ones and then addressed his adorations to that 
charming one who had snapped tlie fetters of desire. And 
the righteous Vali held on the crown of his head that 
auspicious and sacred water with which Hari’s feet had been 
washed, and which is capable of destroying the sins of one’s 
race,—(that water) which was held on his head with pro- 
found reverence by that god of gods Girisha wearing the Moon 
on his forehead. And the auspicious Vali said: “ Welcome, 
i salute thee, O Brahmana. What shall I do for thee? O 
noble One, I deem thee as the very Incarnate asceticism of 
Br4hmanas. To-day have my ancestors been gratified, to- 
day hath my race been sanctified. And since thou hast 
come under my roof, to-day hath my sacrifice been satis. 
factorily performed. To-day have I properly worshipped 
the god of fire and others, according tothe ordinance, and 
this ground belonging to me who have had my sins washed 
- away with the water, wherewith thou hast washed thy feet, 
hath been hallowed with the tread of thy tiny feet. O son 
of a twice-born one, O Brahmana’s son, do thou receive 
whatever thou mayst desire. O Vipra’s son, me-thinks thou 
wishest to have something. O thou eminently éntitled to 
the regard of people, O Vipra, accept kine, or gold, or 
goodly edifices, or sweet viands or girls, or flourishing 
villages, or horses or eléphants, or cars. 


CHAPTER XTX. 


Ts AUSPICIOUS SUKA said :—Hearing the virtuous and 
sweet words of Virochana’s son, the Lord, delightedly. wel- 
coming him, said :— 

THE Lorb said:—O Lord of men, all thy words are 
virtuous, truthful, praiseworthy and worthy dhy race; for 
the descendants of Vrigu and thy old grandfather of quiescent 
soul (Prahlada) are witnesses of the religion relating to the 
next world, -No such miserly person, devoid of the quality 
of goodness, has been born in thy family who has either 
disregarded the twice-borns, or having promised has not 
given (athing). O king, there are no such foolish persons, 
in your family, who turn their back, when begged (fora 
thing) either on the occasion of a gift or in the battle-field,; 
in thine family Prahlada shines in pure fame like unto 
the moon in the sky. Born in this, Hiranyaksha, with the 
mace in hand, travelled over the earth alone for conquest 
and did not meet with his rival. While he came for re- 
leasing the earth (in the boar-form), Vishnu having defeated 
him with great difficulty and remembering his profuse energy 
considered himself virtuous ; and hearing of his destruction 
his brother Hiranyakacipu, enraged, went to the abode of 
Hari for destroying the slayer of his brother. Beholding him 
approach like Kritanta (Death) with mace in hand, the fore- 
most of those conversant with illusion, Vishnu, having a 
knowledge of the time, thus thought. ‘Wherever I am 
going he is there like unto the Death of créatures; he has 
his vision outside, so let me enter his heart.’ Having thus 
settled, the foremost of the cetestials entered by the nostril 
into the body of his enemy who was running about; his 


6 
SRIMADBHAGABATAM, 7 


mind (however) was greatly agitated and breatn disappeared 
from his subtle body. Going round his habitation and 
finding it empty he, enraged, cried aloud; and searching 
the earth, heaven, sky, quarters, holes, oceans and all over, 
the hero did not behold Vishnu. Not beholding him he said 
“‘T have searched all over the world and did not see him; 
forsooth the slayer of my brother has gone there from 
where no person returns.’ The enmity and anger, be- 
gotten by the consciousness of self, of all men, last till 
death since they are engendered by ignorance. Thy father 
the son of the Prahlada, fond of the twice-borns, knowingly 
conferred, when begged his own lease of life upon 
the deities assuming the forms of the twice-born ones. 
Thou hast resorted to virtues practised by house-holder 
Brahmanas, by heroes born before and other high-minded and 
illustrious great men. [ do beg of thee only a piece of 
ground, so much as to cover my three foot-steps. O king of 
Daityas! O king! I do not beg any thing else of thee, who 
art liberal and the king of the world; for the learned, if 
they take what is required, are not visited witlr sin.” 

VALI said:— Alas} O son of Brahmana, thy words are 
worthy of the old, thou art a boy and thy ignorant mind, 
is not alive to self-interest. Adoring me with words, who am 
the king of all the worlds, and who cam give away islands 
thou art begging of me insignificant ground to cover three 
footsteps. Seeking my refuge no one should beg again, so 
do thou beg of me sufficient land capable of giving thee 
livelihood. 

Tue Lorp said :—O king! all the lovely objects of the 
world are not capable of satisfying him who has not con- 
trolled his senses ; one dissatisfied with a piece of land’ 
measuring three foot-steps is not satisfied even with an 
island for he shall then aspire to the seven islands with 
nine insular continents. It is heard thaf Veina’s son, Gaya 
and other kings’ who were the lords of the seven islands 


68 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


did not attain to the end of their thirst even by wealth 
and desired-for objects. He is happy who is; satisfied 
with the attainment of what he desires; discontented 
persons, who have not their souls under control, are not 
satisfied even with the three worlds; it is said that discon- 
tentment of mankind with reference to wealth and objects of 
desire is the cause of their destruction ; and satisfaction; 
with the attainment of what one aspires to, is the cause 
of emancipation. The effulgence, of a Brahmana who is 
satisfied with what he seeks, increases and it is destroyed 
by discontentment like by fire water. Therefore do! beg 
of thee, who art foremost of these conferring boons, land 
measuring three footsteps; I shall be contented with this 
grant satisfying my necessity. 

THE auspicious SUKA said :—Being thus accosted, he 
(Vali) smiling said :—“ Then take what thou desirest’”’ and 
took up the vessel of water for granting land to the 
dwarf; apprised of Vishnu’s intention, Usanas, the foremost 
of those conversant with speech, said to his disciple, the 
king of Asuras, who was about to confer the earth upon 
Vishnu. 

SuKRA said :—“O son of Virochana, He is the self-same 
divine, and eternal Vishnu; for accomplishing the object 
of the deities he has been begotten by Kagyapa on Aditi. 
Not knowing the calamity, thou hast promised to confer ‘the 
land on him; me-thinks there is no well-being for the 
Daityas—a great disaster is approaching them. Taking 
from thee thy kingdom, wealth, effulgence, energy, fame, 
Jearning and all, he shall confer them upon Sakra; He is the 
very Hari under the guise of a dwarf (by virtue of) his illu- 
sory powers. Having the universe for his body he shall 
occupy all the worlds with three footsteps ; having conferred 
all on Vishnu, O fool, where shalt thou live? With one foot 
he shall occupy the earth, with another the heavens, and 
the sky and where shall he place the third? Thou shall 


SRIMADBUAGABATAM. fg 
not be able to satisfy thy promise and me-thinks thow 
shalt be doomed to hell for not heing able to give what 
thou didst promise. That gift is Rot spoken well of which 
endangers one’s livelihood, since in this world sacrifice, gift, 
ascetic observance and other works are performed by a rich 
man; he is happy inthis world who divides bis wealth for 
these five-virtue, fame, wealth, objects of desire and kins- 
men. Hear, O foremost of the Asuras, what is laid down 
in Varlivicha Sruti (regarding this)—Whatever is admitted 
saying ‘Yes’ is truth—and ‘no’ is untruth. .It is said that 
truth is‘ the flower and fruit of this. tree of a body ; if this ~ 
tree, whose root is untruth, does not five (where shatl they 
exist ?); As when a tree is uprooted it is soon dried up and 
falls dtowa so when untruth is removed the body is soon 
emaciated. (The word) yes takes wealth to a distance and 
deprives one of it or keeps one unsatisfied; if a person says 
‘yes’ he is soon divorced of his wealth. He, who confers 
all upon the beggar, has not (even his own) desire satiated ; 
and ‘no’—this lie has: fullness in it. But whoever always 
speaks lie saying ‘no’ to everything is always censured and 
‘is like a dead man though living. A falsehood is not blame- 
able for bringing females under control in .jokes, while 
speaking ‘highly of a bridegroom, for keeping one's livelihood, 
when one’s life is at stake and while injuring others on 
behalf of kine and Brahmanas. 


CHAPTER XX. 


r 
Pe AUSPICIOUS Suka said :-—O king, being thus accost- 
ed by his family preceptor, the master of the house, Vali re- 


70 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


mained silent for some time and then with a controlled mind 
said to his preceptor. 

VALI said:—What has been said by thee endued with 
Spiritual wealth is true. What does not at any time obstruct 
Artha, Kama, fame and livelihood is the religion of the 
house-holders. Promising unto him that [ shall give, how 
can I, the descendant of Prahlada, for covetousness, dis- 
_tegard the twice-born one like an ordinary cheat; for there 
is no-greater sin than untruth; the earth has said “I can 
bear everything save the liars’. I do not (0 much) fear from 
hell, poverty, the ocean of uneasiness, displacement of 
position and from death, as I do from enticing thé Bralmanas. 
The land and other things in this world shalt renounce 
a person when he is dead; and what is the use of giving 
that which does not satisfy a Brahmana? Dadhyang, Sivi 
and other pious sages. encompassed the well-being of crea- 
tures even by their lives which it is so hard to re- 
nounce ; what consideration there is for earth and other 
things? O Brahman, all these leading Daityas, ever 
successful in warfare, who enjoyed the earth, have 
been robbed both of their this life and next by Kala, 
but the fame they acquired has not been. O Brahmana 
Saint, persons renouncing their lives in warfare are easily 
seen—but such is not the case with those who, when the 
worthy persons come, reverentially confer their riches on 
them. Even poverty, in consequence of satisfying the 
desire of an ordinary beggar, is welcome to kind-hearted 
and intelligent persons, why not then for (granting the 
requests) of persons like thyself conversant with Brahinan, 
I shall therefore confer upon this dwarf his desired-for object. 
O Muni, I shall confer upon him his desired-for land, even 
if he be my enemy or‘Vishnu whom thou, proficient in the 
Vedas, adores with sacrifices ; I shall not injure my enemy 
in the disguise of a terrified Brahmana, even if he impiously 
binds me who am innocent. If he be the illustrious Lord not 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM, ° 71 


desirous of forgoing His own fame he shall wrest (from me 
this earth), after slaying me in battle or he shall be slain 
by me. 

THE AusPicious SUKA said:—The preceptor thus im- 
precated his truthful and intelligent disciple who irreveren- 
tially did not carry out his command, saying ;— “Thou art 
ignorant and proud of thy learning—thy prosperity shall 
soon wither away.” Being thus cursed by his own preceptor 
the high-minded Vali did not deviate from truth; and ador- 
ing the dwarf.and touching water conferred upon him the 
land. Thereupon his wife Vindhyavali, adorned with a pearl- 
necklace, coming there, brought a golden jar filled with 
water; washing himself therewith, his (the dwarf’s) grace- 
ful feet with great delight, (Vali), desirous: of performing 
sacrifice, then placed on his own head the water purifying 
the universe, There-upon eulogising his action the celestials, 
Gandharvas, Sidhas, Vidyadharas, Charanas and others, with 
great delight, began to shower flowers upon that king of 
the Asuras; and thousands of Dundhubhis were incessantly 
sounded; then the Gandharvas, Kimpurushas and Kinnaras 
began to sing :-—“ Oh, what a hard work has been performed 
by the high-minded Vali, since knowing, he has conferred 
the three worlds upon his own enemy.’? The dwarf form of 
the infinite Hari wonderfully increased, and it, being identical 
with threefold qualities, in it existed the earth, sky, quarters 
heaven, holes, occeans, beasts, birds, celestials and all the 
Rishis. In the body identical with threefold qualities of 
Hari, endued with great spiritual wealth, Vali, along with the 
preceptor performing Vedic ceremonies and councillors saw 
the five clements, senses, objects of sense ‘and the universe 
of three qualities along with creatures. He, having Indra’s 
army as his own, saw on the sole of the feet, of that uni- 
versal form, Ras&tala, on his feet the earth, on his waist the 
mountain, on his knee-joints the birds and on his thighs the 
Marutas ; (he saw) evening on the raiment of the Lord, the 


972 ‘ SRIMADBHAGARBATAM. 


Patriarch in the organ of excretion, on his genetal organ ” 
many Asuras of whom. you are the leader, in the navel the 
sky, on his sides the seven oceans and on his breast the 
stars; virtue in the heart of Murari, truth and honesty on 
his breast, the moon in his mind, Padma with lotus in hand 
on his breast, and the Saman and all the sounds round his 
neck, Indra and other celestials on his arms, the quarters in 
his ears, the heaven, on the head, the clouds in the hair, 
the wind in the nose, the sun in-the eyes and fire in the 
mouth; the four Vedas in speech, Varuna in the palate, 
prescription and ordinance in the eye brows, the day and 
night on the two rows of eye-lashs, anger on his forehead 
and avarice on the lips; lust in touch, water in seminal fluid, 
impiety on the back, sacrifice in the footsteps, death in the 
shadow, illusion in his smile and Oshadhi on his down; the 
rivers in the entrails, the stones in the nails, Brahma in 
intellect, the celestials and Rishis in organs, the mobile and 
immobile and elements on his person. O king, beholding 
in this way the three worlds in the person of the dwarf, 
identical with all, the Asuras were deprived of their cons- 
ciousness ; then encircling the Lord, the master of the discus 
Sudarshana of unbearable energy, of Sharnga bow having a 
deep sound like the rumbling of clouds, of Panchajani (conch) 
emitting sound like thunder, the sword Vidyadhara set with 
a hundred moons, an excellent pair of quivers and unend- 
ing arrows. Sunanda and other leading followers, along with 
the Lokap4las began to sing his glory. And adorned with a 
diadem, Angadas and Makara-shaped Kundalas as also with 
Srivatsa, the foremost of jewels, Mekhala and raiment, en- 
garlanded with a garland of wild flowers accompanied with the 
humming of the black bees the Divine Lord shone in great 
-brilliance. There-upon with his one foot was occupied the entire 
land of Vali, with his body the sky and with his two arms 
the quarters. His second foot was accomodated by heaven 
but no_room was left for the third. There-upon going above 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 73 


‘heaven through Maharloka, Yapaloka and Janaloka it reached 


Satyaloka. 


CHAPTER XXI. 


; Ts AusPici0us SuKA said :—(Beholding his second foot 
reach) Satyaloka, the lotus-sprung (Brahma), whose efful- 
gence was clouded by the effulgence of his nails and who 
himself was enshrouded thereby, M&richi and other Rishis of 
great penances, Sananda and other ascetics approacheg 
him. (Thereupon persons versed in) the Vedas, minor 
Vedas, ordinances, literature relating to self-control, logic, 
history, the various divisions of the Vedas, Puranas, Samhitas 
as well as those persons in whom the fire of knowledge 
is enkindled by the wind of yoga and the actions are re- 
duced to dust thereby (approached him). They, attaining 
to the region of Syayambhuva by virtue of the remembrance 
of His lotus feet, began to adore it which cannot be obtained 
(even) by actions, Thereupon the lotus-sprung Deity dedi- 
cated water to the upraised foot of Vishnu from whose 
Jotus navel,he had sprung and worshipping him reverentially 
he began to rehearse his glories. O king of ment being 
purified by washing the foot of the Deity of huge foot-steps 
the water of Brahma’s Kamundala became a river, which 
even now, representing the pure glory of the Lord, falls 
upon the sky and is now purifying the three worlds. Being 
welcomed Brahm4 and other Lokapilas, with their followers, 
brought articles of worship for their own Lord who had 
assumed the form of a dwarf, With cold water, beautiful 
garlands, fragrant sandal paste, sweet-scented incense, 
fried paddy, sunburnt rice and fruits, with the hyming and 
10 


G4 SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


chanting of his energy and glory, besides with dancing, 
siiging; and sounding of conch and Dundhabhi they 
celebrated the festival. Thereupon the king of bears Jam- 
bhuvana, with the sound of bugle, adnounced the festival on 
all sides. Beholding their lord, initiated in sacrifice, robbed of 
the entire earth by a deceiptful prayer for a piece of 
ground to cover three footsteps, the Asuras in great anger 
said. ‘He is not Vishnu, the friend of Brahmana; he is the 
fotetiiost of those versed in illusion ; this wicked one, under 
the disguise of a Brahmana, is desirous of accomplishing the 
work of the gods ; this enemy, in the shape of a dwarf, being | 
4 beggat, has deprived our master of all; our lord is always 
truthful and has especially of late been engaged in sacrifice ; 
he is always well-meaning,. kind unto the Brahmanas and 
shall never thé able to speak a lie. Therefore to destroy 
himt is out duty as well as our service to our master.” 
Saying this, the Asuras, the servants of Vali, took up weapons 
and with mace and Pathicas in their hands, ran in great 
anger for slaying the dwarf; but Vali did not wish all this. 
O king! Beholding those Daitya-ccommanders tun quickly 
Vishnw’s followers, spirited and uplifting their respective 
weapons, thwatted them. Nanda, Sunanda, Jaya Vijaya, 
Pravala, Kumeda, Kumudaksha, Visvaksena, Garuda, Jayanta 
Shrutadeva, Pushpadanta, and Satvata, who were all gifted 
with the strength. of Ayuta elephants, began to slay the demo- 
naic hosts. Beholding his followers about to be slain and re- 
membering the imprecation of the preceptor Sukra Vali 
prevented his soldiers, saying “O Viprachitta! O Rahut 
O Nemi! hear me, do not fight, desist, the time is not favour- 
able unto us. O ye Daityas! no person can surpass Him 
in energy, who is Lord of all. creatures in the distribution 
of happiness and misery. The Lord, who was formerly in 
our favour and against the celestials, is now acting on the 
contrary ; by nothing—councillors, army, intellect, counsel, 
cee tics medicine, or peace,y—can a man overcome the influence 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM, 95 


of time. True, you had defeated again and again those fol- 
lowers of Hari, but now empowered by Destiny, they are 
roaring, having vanquished us all in battle. And if Destiny 
is propitiated with us, we shall again defeat them; do ye 
wait for the time which shall be favourable unto us.’ . 
THE AUSPICIOUS SUKA said:—O king} hearing the words 
of their master, the leaders of the Daitya and Danava hosts 
addressed themselves for entering into the region under- 
neath the earth in fear of the aggrandisement of the fol- 
lowers of Vishnu. Thereupon oi the day of ablution sub- 
sequent to the sacrifice, the king of birds, Tarksha’s son, 
‘informed of.the desire of the Lord, bound Vali with the Varuni 
noose. The king of the Asuras béing thus assailed by the 
powerful Vishnu, there arose from all sides of heaven and 
earth great lamentations; then O king! the Divine Dwarf 
said to the illustrious (Vali) of firm understandiig who was 
bound by the Varuni noose and was accordingly shorn of his 
.effulgence :—~“O Asura! thou hast conferred upon me ground 
to accomodate my three footsteps—with two the whole earth 
has been occupied ; determine (room) for the third. The 
earth is thine as far as the sun spreads its heat, and the 
moon spreads its lustre with the stars and the clouds pour 
theic'contents. The earth has been occupied by my one foot 
the sky and the quarters have been occupied by my body— 
behold the heaven has been occupied by my second, every. 
thing belonging to thee has (thus) been occupied; thou shouldst 
now dwell in hell for not satisfying thy promise; so do thou 
enter hell with the permission of thy preceptor, In vain 
is his desire, the heaven is far off from him, and he falls 
down who does not satisfy his promise unto a Brahmana and 
in fact cheats him. Being proud, thou hast not given-me,what 
thou didst promise and rather hast cheated me; in conse-~ 
quence of this untruth thou shouldst for some years live in hell, 


een ZY) emerent, 


CHAPTER XXII. 


Ls AUSPICIOUS SUKA said :—O king! being thus in- 
jured by the lord, the Asura Vali, (although) shaken (from 
truth) with an unagitated. mind, gave vent to the following 
manly words. : 

VALI said :—O illustrious Lord 1 O foremost of deities, 
if thou dost consider my promise as false, I shall satisfy it, 
and my words shall not prove deceiptful; do thou place thy 
third foot on my head. [ do not fear so much hell, dis- 
placement or being bound by a noose, dreadful catamity, 
_pecuniary difficulties or thine unfavourable attitude, as I do 
acrime. ‘Me-thinks the punishment that thou art meteing 
out unto me is most praiseworthy unto all men, siace neither 
father, mother, brother nor friends can inftict it. Forsooth 
in the disguise of an enemy thou art the great preceptor of 
of all the Asuras, since thou hast manifested unto us the eye 
of the knowledge destructive of the enebriation of pride. 
There is no shame or affliction (for me) in being injured 
and bound with Varuni noose by thee ‘of mighty deeds, by 
being inimical unto whom many Asuras obtained that Sidhi 
which the earnest Yogis can only acquire. My grand- 
father Prahlada, whose glory is manifest all over, was thine 
favourite; he was much persecuted by his father who was 
thine enemy. Of what use there will be the bodies left off on 
this earth at the expiration of the lease of life by the Asuras 
passing under the appellation of kinsmen ? Of what use is 
the wife the root of the world? Of what use is the house 
which merely expends life?” Determining this, O best one, 
my greatly wise grand-father, being afraid of his kinsmen, 
resorted to thy true lotus-feet which are not touched by 
fear—who art the destroyer of his relatives, I have also by 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 71 


Destiny been brought near thee-who art my enemy, by whom 
I have been by force freed of my wealth, being possessed 
by which people cannot consider this life as frail even when 
they are on the verge of death.” 

_ Tue auspicious SukA said :—O foremost of Kurus, while 
he was speaking thus, Prahlada, beloved of the lord, came 
there rising like the full moon. He (Vali) having an army 
like that of Indra saw his own grand father, shinning in his 
effulgence, having eyes expanded like lotuses, yellow raiment, 
long armas, tall and yellow-hued. Being bound by the noose 
of Varuna, Vali could not worship him with presents as 
before ; he bowed down his head with tears in his eyes and 
looked down in shame. Beholding there the Lord of the 
Universe, Hari, attended upon by Sunanda and other follow- 
ers, the high-minded (Prahlada), approaching, touched 
the grouud being over-whelmed with tears of joy. (He 
said) :—" Thou hast not pilfered the’ most exalted position 
of Indra thou didst confer on him but hast taken it back 
‘ only to make it more graceful; methinks, thou hast shown 
fim a great favour, since he has been shorn of wealth which 
brings about the bewilderment of soul and by which the 
wise lose their good sense and cannot properly see the 
course of their own soul. Salutation unto thee the great 
Lord Narayana, the witness of all the worlds.” 

THE AUSPICIOUS SuKA said:—O king, before Prahlada 
(standing) with folded arms the Divine Brahma said this to 
the slayer of Madhu. O king, beholding (het) husband bound, 
his chaste wife, overwhelmed with fear,said with folded hands 
and head downwards. 

THE AUSPICIOUS VINDHAVALI said :~These™ three worlds 
have been created by thee for thine sport ; the vicious-minded 
imagine themselves as their master; can those persons, who 
are shameless, and to whom thou has attributed the epithet 
(“ We are doers) attribute anything to thee, who art the 
creator, the preserver and the destroyer of the world? 


78 : SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


THE AUSPICIOUS BRAHMA said :—O supporter of creatures, 
O lord of elements, O thou identical with the upiverse, do 
thou release him who has been deprived of every thing ; he 
does not deserve this aggrandisement. The entire earth and 
allthe regions acquired by his own actions and his every 
thing even his own soul have been given away by him 
without any hesitation. One, renouncing deceipt and bestow- 
ing mere water upon thine feet and dedicating unto thee 
mere grass, attains to an excellent state; then why does he 
giving away without any hesitation the three worlds, meet 
with this calamity ? The lord said :—O- Brahman, unto whom 
I extend favour I take away his wealth, which creates infa- 
tuation in a person and by which, he, divorced from humility, 
shows disregard towards me and all others. The soul of 
creatures, being dependent, wanders in various species 
by its own actions and then attains to the state of a 
man. And there is my favour, if inthis birth he is not in- 
fatuated by birth, action, youth, beauty, education, prosperity 
and wealth. My votaries, though born in a species, that for 
inhumility iis inimical to all creatures and every form of 
well-being, are never infatuated. This Danava is the fore- 
most of the Daityas and the enhancer of their fame ; he has 
conquered irrepressible Maya ; so, though he is exhausted, he 
is not infatuated ; he has been deprived of his wealth, dislodged 
from his position, bound by his enemy, maddened, cast off 
by his kinsmen and put to various inflictions. He was 
remonstrated with by his preceptor and cursed ; and still, of 
firm vow as he is, he did not leave off truth ;—truthful as he is, 
he is not deviating from the virtue, which has been declared 
by me under disguise. He has been conferred upon by me 
a position which it is hard to attain; he hastaken my shelter 
and he shall be Indea in Sfvarni Manwantara. Till then, 
let him live in Sutala constructed by Vishuakarma ; those 
who live there, being espied by me, are not:subject to cala- 
mities, disease, exhaustion, sleepiness and defeat. (He then 


Hie a pee 


eee - moa 
“hy 


ees , 
NTT 


hig ag 00142884 


“ 3 7 
ie ee Ore: ips ete ares Bees 
\ « 7 
re ‘ ace. 
oof : pair 
: ‘“, . ie io 
\ aoe 
> Ne Be 
ee aes ae 
» i - 
i SN ,? 
ee g 
ame 
-_ wy 
Iytate _ 
oh 
. | 
a> oa 
Se a < 
+ ' d 
mo Nee | 
fe . ft 
: See ata 
bd c oo” a 
es 
‘ 


. ae emer 
Digitized with financial assistance from the 


Government of Maharashtra 
on 10 March, 2016 


