Sanskrit Text and English Translation 
According to H.H. Wilson 



Preface 


• Introduction 

• Date Of The Purans 

• Form Of The Pur anas 

• Classification Of The Puranas 
01. The Brahma Pur ana 

02. The Padma Purana 
03. The Vishnu Purana 
04. The Vayaviya Purana 
05. The Bhagavat Purana 
06. The Naradiya Purana 
07. The Markandeya Purana 
08. The Agni Purana 
09. The Bhavishya Purana 

10. The Brahma-Vaivartta Purana 

11. The Linga Purana 

12. The Varaha Purana 

13. The Skanda Purana 

14. The Vamana Purana 

15. The Kurma Purana 

16. The Matsya Purana 

17. The Garuda Purana 

18. The Brahmanda Purana 

• The Upa-Puranas 

• Synopsis Of The Vishnu Purana 

• Book One 

• Book Two 

• The Third Book 

• The Fourth Book 

• The Fifth Book 

• The Sixth Book 

• Date Of The Vishnu purana 

• Conclusion 





Introduction 


THE literature of the Hindus has now been cultivated for many years with 
singular diligence, and in many of its branches with eminent success. There are 
some departments, however, which are yet but partially and imperfectly 
investigated; and we are far from being in possession of that knowledge which 
the authentic writings of the Hindus alone can give us of their religion, 
mythology, and historical traditions. 

From the materials to which we have hitherto had access, it seems probable that 
there have been three principal forms in which the religion of the Hindus has 
existed, at as many different periods. The duration of those periods, the 
circumstances of their succession, and the precise state of the national faith at 
each season, it is not possible to trace with any approach to accuracy. The 
premises have been too imperfectly determined to authorize other than 
conclusions of a general and somewhat vague description, and those remain to 
be hereafter confirmed or corrected by more extensive and satisfactory research. 

The earliest form under which the Hindu religion appears is that taught in the 
Vedas. The style of the language, and the purport of the composition of those 
works, as far as we are acquainted with them, indicate a date long anterior to that 
of any other class of Sanscrit writings. It is yet, however, scarcely safe to 
advance an opinion of the precise belief or philosophy which they inculcate. To 
enable us to judge of their tendency, we have only a general sketch of their 
arrangement and contents, with a few extracts, by Mr. Colebrooke, in the Asiatic 
Researches a few incidental observations by Mr. Ellis, in the same miscellany 
and a translation of the first book of the Sanhita, or collection of the prayers of 
the Rig-veda, by Dr. Rosen and some of the Upanishads, or speculative treatises, 
attached to, rather than part of, the Vedas, by Rammohun Roy. Of the religion 
taught in the Vedas, Mr. Colebrooke's opinion will probably be received as that 
which is best entitled to deference, as certainly no Sanscrit scholar has been 
equally conversant with the original works. "The real doctrine of the Indian 
scripture is the unity of the Deity, in whom the universe is comprehended; and 
the seeming polytheism which it exhibits, offers the elements and the stars and 
planets as gods. The three principal manifestations of the divinity, with other 


personified attributes and energies, and most of the other gods of Hindu 
mythology, are indeed mentioned, or at least indicated, in the Veda. But the 
worship of deified heroes is no part of the system; nor are the incarnations of 
deities suggested in any portion of the text which I have yet seen, though such 
are sometimes hinted at by the commentators Some of these statements may 
perhaps require modification; for without a careful examination of all the prayers 
of the Vedas, it would be hazardous to assert that they contain no indication 
whatever of hero-worship; and certainly they do appear to allude occasionally to 
the Avataras, or incarnations, of Vishnu. Still, however, it is true that the 
prevailing character of the ritual of the Vedas is the worship of the personified 
elements; of Agni, or fire; Indra, the firmament; Vayu, the air; Varuria, the water; 
of Aditya, the sun; Soma, the moon; and other elementary and planetary 
personages. It is also true that the worship of the Vedas is for the most part 
domestic worship, consisting of prayers and oblations offered--in their own 
houses, not in temples—by individuals for individual good, and addressed to 
unreal presences, not to visible types. In a word, the religion of the Vedas was 
not idolatry. 

It is not possible to conjecture when this more simple and primitive form of 
adoration was succeeded by the worship of images and types, representing 
Brahma, Vishnu, Siva, and other imaginary beings, constituting a mythological 
pantheon of most ample extent; or when Rama and Krishna, who appear to have 
been originally real and historical characters, were elevated to the dignity of 
divinities. Image-worship is alluded to by Manu in several passages, but with an 
intimation that those Brahmans who subsist by ministering in temples are an 
inferior and degraded class. The story of the Ramayaria and Mahabharata turns 
wholly upon the doctrine of incarnations, all the chief dramatis personae of the 
poems being impersonations of gods and demigods and celestial spirits. The 
ritual appears to be that of the Vedas, and it may be doubted if any allusion to 
image-worship occurs; but the doctrine of propitiation by penance and praise 
prevails throughout, and Vishnu and Siva are the especial objects of panegyric 
and invocation. In these two works, then, we trace unequivocal indications of a 
departure from the elemental worship of the Vedas, and the origin or elaboration 
of legends, which form the great body of the mythological religion of the 
Hindus. How far they only improved upon the cosmogony and chronology of 
their predecessors, or in what degree the traditions of families and dynasties may 
originate with them, are questions that can only be determined when the Vedas 



and the two works in question shall have been more thoroughly examined. 


The different works known by the name of Puranas are evidently derived from 
the same religious system as the Ramayana and Mahabharata, or from the 
mytho-heroic stage of Hindu belief. They present, however, peculiarities which 
designate their belonging to a later period, and to an important modification in 
the progress of opinion. They repeat the theoretical cosmogony of the two great 
poems; they expand and systematize the chronological computations; and they 
give a more definite and connected representation of the mythological fictions, 
and the historical traditions. But besides these and other particulars, which may 
be derivable from an old, if not from a primitive era, they offer characteristic 
peculiarities of a more modern description, in the paramount importance which 
they assign to individual divinities, in the variety and purport of the rites and 
observances addressed to them, and in the invention of new legends illustrative 
of the power and graciousness of those deities, and of the efficacy of implicit 
devotion to them. Siva and Vishnu, under one or other form, are almost the sole 
objects that claim the homage of the Hindus in the Puranas; departing from the 
domestic and elemental ritual of the Vedas, and exhibiting a sectarial fervour and 
exclusiveness not traceable in the Ramayana, and only to a qualified extent in 
the Mahabharata. They are no longer authorities for Hindu belief as a whole: 
they are special guides for separate and sometimes conflicting branches of it, 
compiled for the evident purpose of promoting the preferential, or in some cases 
the sole, worship of Vishnu or of Siva. 

That the Puranas always bore the character here given of them, may admit of 
reasonable doubt; that it correctly applies to them as they now are met with, the 
following pages will irrefragably substantiate. It is possible, however, that there 
may have been an earlier class of Puranas, of which those we now have are but 
the partial and adulterated representatives. The identity of the legends in many of 
them, and still more the identity of the words—for in several of them long 
passages are literally the same—is a sufficient proof that in all such cases they 
must be copied either from some other similar work, or from a common and 
prior original. It is not unusual also for a fact to be stated upon the authority of 
an 'old stanza,' which is cited accordingly; shewing the existence of an earlier 
source of information: and in very many instances legends are alluded to, not 
told; evincing acquaintance with their prior narration somewhere else. The name 
itself, Purana, which implies 'old,' indicates the object of the compilation to be 



the preservation of ancient traditions, a purpose in the present condition of the 
Puranas very imperfectly fulfilled. Whatever weight may be attached to these 
considerations, there is no disputing evidence to the like effect afforded by other 
and unquestionable authority. The description given by Mr. Colebrooke of the 
contents of a Purana is taken from Sanscrit writers. The Lexicon of Amara Sinha 
gives as a synonyme of Purana, Pancha-lakshanam, 'that which has five 
characteristic topics:' and there is no difference of opinion amongst the scholiasts 
as to what these are. They are, as Mr. Colebrooke mentions, 1. Primary creation, 
or cosmogony; 2. Secondary creation, or the destruction and renovation of 
worlds, including chronology; 3. Genealogy of gods and patriarchs; 4. Reigns of 
the Manus, or periods called Manwantaras; and 5. History, or such particulars as 
have been preserved of the princes of the solar and lunar races, and of their 
descendants to modern times. Such, at any rate, were the constituent and 
characteristic portions of a Purana in the days of Amara Sinha, fifty-six years 
before the Christian era; and if the Puranas had undergone no change since his 
time, such we should expect to find them still. Do they conform to this 
description? Not exactly in any one instance: to some of them it is utterly 
inapplicable; to others it only partially applies. There is not one to which it 
belongs so entirely as to the Vishnu Purana, and it is one of the circumstances 
which gives to this work a more authentic character than most of its fellows can 
pretend to. Yet even in this instance we have a book upon the institutes of society 
and obsequial rites interposed between the Manwantaras and the genealogies of 
princes, and a life of Krishna separating the latter from an account of the end of 
the world, besides the insertion of various legends of a manifestly popular and 
sectarial character. No doubt many of the Puranas, as they now are, correspond 
with the view which Col. Vans Kennedy takes of their purport. "I cannot 
discover in them," he remarks, "any other object than that of religious 
instruction." The description of the earth and of the planetary system, and the 
lists of royal races which occur in them, he asserts to be "evidently extraneous, 
and not essential circumstances, as they are entirely omitted in some Puranas, 
and very concisely illustrated in others; while, on the contrary, in all the Puranas 
some or other of the leading principles, rites, and observances of the Hindu 
religion are fully dwelt upon, and illustrated either by suitable legends or by 
prescribing the ceremonies to be practised, and the prayers and invocations to be 
employed, in the worship of different deities," Now, however accurate this 
description may be of the Puranas as they are, it is clear that it does not apply to 
what they were when they were synonymously designated as Pancha-lakshanas, 



or 'treatises on five topics;' not one of which five is ever specified by text or 
comment to be "religious instruction." In the knowledge of Amara Sinha the lists 
of princes were not extraneous and unessential, and their being now so 
considered by a writer so well acquainted with the contents of the Puranas as 
Col. Vans Kennedy is a decisive proof that since the days of the lexicographer 
they have undergone some material alteration, and that we have not at present 
the same works in all respects that were current under the denomination of 
Puranas in the century prior to Christianity. 

The inference deduced from the discrepancy between the actual form and the 
older definition of a Purana, unfavourable to the antiquity of the extant works 
generally, is converted into certainty when we come to examine them in detail; 
for although they have no dates attached to them, yet circumstances are 
sometimes mentioned or alluded to, or references to authorities are made, or 
legends are narrated, or places are particularized, of which the comparatively 
recent date is indisputable, and which enforce a corresponding reduction of the 
antiquity of the work in which they are discovered. At the same time they may 
be acquitted of subservience to any but sectarial imposture. They were pious 
frauds for temporary purposes: they never emanated from any impossible 
combination of the Brahmans to fabricate for the antiquity of the entire Hindu 
system any claims which it cannot fully support. A very great portion of the 
contents of many, some portion of the contents of all, is genuine and old. The 
sectarial interpolation or embellishment is always sufficiently palpable to be set 
aside, without injury to the more authentic and primitive material; and the 
Puranas, although they belong especially to that stage of the Hindu religion in 
which faith in some one divinity was the prevailing principle, are also a valuable 
record of the form of Hindu belief which came next in order to that of the Vedas; 
which grafted hero-worship upon the simpler ritual of the latter; and which had 
been adopted, and was extensively, perhaps universally established in India at 
the time of the Greek invasion. The Hercules of the Greek writers was 
indubitably the Balarama of the Hindus; and their notices of Mathura on the 
Jumna, and of the kingdom of the Suraseni and the Pandaean country, evidence 
the prior currency of the traditions which constitute the argument of the 
Mahabharata, and which are constantly repeated in the Puranas, relating to the 
Pandava and Yadava races, to Krishna and his contemporary heroes, and to the 
dynasties of the solar and lunar kings. 



The theogony and cosmogony of the Puranas may probably be traced to the 
Vedas. They are not, as far as is yet known, described in detail in those works, 
but they are frequently alluded to in a strain more or less mystical and obscure, 
which indicates acquaintance with their existence, and which seems to have 
supplied the Puranas with the groundwork of their systems. The scheme of 
primary or elementary creation they borrow from the Sankhya philosophy, which 
is probably one of the oldest forms of speculation on man and nature amongst 
the Hindus. Agreeably, however, to that part of the Paurariik character which 
there is reason to suspect of later origin, their inculcation of the worship of a 
favourite deity, they combine the interposition of a creator with the independent 
evolution of matter in a somewhat contradictory and unintelligible style. It is 
evident too that their accounts of secondary creation, or the developement of the 
existing forms of things, and the disposition of the universe, are derived from 
several and different sources; and it appears very likely that they are to be 
accused of some of the incongruities and absurdities by which the narrative is 
disfigured, in consequence of having attempted to assign reality and significancy 
to what was merely metaphor or mysticism. There is, however, amidst the 
unnecessary complexity of the description, a general agreement amongst them as 
to the origin of things, and their final distribution; and in many of the 
circumstances there is a striking concurrence with the ideas which seem to have 
pervaded the whole of the ancient world, and which we may therefore believe to 
be faithfully represented in the Puranas. 

The Pantheism of the Puranas is one of their invariable characteristics, although 
the particular divinity, who is all things, from whom all things proceed, and to 
whom all things return, be diversified according to their individual sectarial bias. 
They seem to have derived the notion from the Vedas: but in them the one 
universal Being is of a higher order than a personification of attributes or 
elements, and, however imperfectly conceived, or unworthily described, is God. 
In the Puranas the one only Supreme Being is supposed to be manifest in the 
person of Siva or Vishnu, either in the way of illusion or in sport; and one or 
other of these divinities is therefore also the cause of all that is, is himself all that 
exists. The identity of God and nature is not a new notion; it was very general in 
the speculations of antiquity, but it assumed a new vigour in the early ages of 
Christianity, and was carried to an equal pitch of extravagance by the Platonic 
Christians as by the Saiva or Vaishriava Hindus. It seems not impossible that 
there was some communication between them. We know that there was an active 



communication between India and the Red sea in the early ages of the Christian 
era, and that doctrines, as well as articles of merchandise, were brought to 
Alexandria from the former. Epiphanius and Eusebius accuse Scythianus of 
having imported from India, in the second century, books on magic, and heretical 
notions leading to Manichaeism; and it was at the same period that Ammonius 
instituted the sect of the new Platonists at Alexandria. The basis of his heresy 
was, that true philosophy derived its origin from the eastern nations: his doctrine 
of the identity of God and the universe is that of the Vedas and Puranas; and the 
practices he enjoined, as well as their object, were precisely those described in 
several of the Puranas under the name of Yoga. His disciples were taught "to 
extenuate by mortification and contemplation the bodily restraints upon the 
immortal spirit, so that in this life they might enjoy communion with the 
Supreme Being, and ascend after death to the universal Parent ." That these are 
Hindu tenets the following pages will testify; and by the admission of their 
Alexandrian teacher, they originated in India. The importation was perhaps not 
wholly unrequited; the loan may not have been left unpaid. It is not impossible 
that the Hindu doctrines received fresh animation from their adoption by the 
successors of Ammonius, and especially by the mystics, who may have 
prompted, as well as employed, the expressions of the Puranas. Anquetil du 
Perron has given, in the introduction to his translation of the 'Oupnekhat,' several 
hymns by Synesius, a bishop of the beginning of the fifth century, which may 
serve as parallels to many of the hymns and prayers addressed to Vishnu in the 
Vishnu Puraria. 

But the ascription to individual and personal deities of the attributes of the one 
universal and spiritual Supreme Being, is an indication of a later date than the 
Vedas certainly, and apparently also than the Ramayaria, where Rama, although 
an incarnation of Vishnu, commonly appears in his human character alone. 
There is something of the kind in the Mahabharata in respect to Krishna, 
especially in the philosophical episode known as the Bhagavad Gita. In other 
places the divine nature of Krishna is less decidedly affirmed; in some it is 
disputed or denied; and in most of the situations in which he is exhibited in 
action, it is as a prince and warrior, not as a divinity. He exercises no 
superhuman faculties in the defence of himself or his friends, or in the defeat and 
destruction of his foes. The Mahabharata, however, is evidently a work of 
various periods, and requires to be read throughout carefully and critically before 
its weight as an authority can be accurately appreciated. As it is now in type — 



thanks to the public spirit of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, and their secretary 
Mr. J. Prinsep—it will not be long before the Sanscrit scholars of the continent 
will accurately appreciate its value. 


Footnotes 


01. Vol. VIII. 

02. Vol. XIV. 

03. Published by the Oriental Translation Fund Committee. 

04. A translation of the principal Upanishads was published under the title of 
Oupnekhat, or Theologia Indica, by Anquetil du Perron: but it was made 
through the medium of the Persian, and is very incorrect and obscure. A 
translation of a very different character has been some time in course of 
preparation by M. Poley. 

05. As. Res. vol. VIII. 

06. B. III. 152, 164. B. IV. 214. 

07. Besides the three periods marked by the Vedas, Heroic Poems, and 
Puranas, a fourth may be dated from the influence exercised by the Tantras 
upon Hindu practice and belief; but we are yet too little acquainted with those 
works, or their origin, to speculate safely upon their consequences. 

08. As. Res. vol. VII. 

09. The following definition of a Purana is constantly quoted: it is found in the 
Vishnu, Matsya, Vayu, and other Puranas: 


Martini ii 


Click to view A variation of reading in the beginning of the second line is 
noticed by Ramasrama, the scholiast on Amara, 



Click to view 'Destruction of the earth and the rest, or final dissolution:' in 
which case the genealogies of heroes and princes are comprised in those of the 
patriarchs. 

10. Researches into the Nature and Affinity of Ancient and Hindu Mythology, 
and note. 

11. Adv. Manichaeos. 

12. Hist. Evang. 

13. Mosheim, vol. I. 

14. See et seq. 

15. Theologia et Philosophia Indica, Dissert. 

16. Three volumes have been printed: the fourth and last is understood to be 
nearly completed. 




Date Of The Puranas 


The Puranas are also works of evidently different ages, and have been compiled 
under different circumstances, the precise nature of which we can but 
imperfectly conjecture from internal evidence, and from what we know of the 
history of religious opinion in India. It is highly probable, that of the present 
popular forms of the Hindu religion, none assumed their actual state earlier than 
the time of Sankara Acharya, the great Saiva reformer, who flourished, in all 
likelihood, in the eighth or ninth century. Of the Vaishriava teachers, Ramanuja 
dates in the twelfth century, Madhwacharya in the thirteenth, and Vallabha in the 
sixteenth and the Puranas seem to have accompanied or followed their 
innovations, being obviously intended to advocate the doctrines they taught. This 
is to assign to some of them a very modern date, it is true; but I cannot think that 
a higher can with justice be ascribed to them. This, however, applies to some 
only out of the number, as I shall presently proceed to specify. 

Another evidence of a comparatively modern date must be admitted in those 
chapters of the Puranas which, assuming a prophetic tone, foretell what 
dynasties of kings will reign in the Kali age. These chapters, it is true, are found 
but in four of the Puranas, but they are conclusive in bringing down the date of 
those four to a period considerably subsequent to Christianity. It is also to be 
remarked, that the Vayu, Vishnu, Bhagavata, and Matsya Puranas, in which 
these particulars are foretold, have in all other respects the character of as great 
antiquity as any works of their class. 


Footnotes 

17. As. Res. vols. XVI. and XVII. Account of Hindu Sects. 

18. On the history of the composition of the Puranas, as they now appear, I 
have hazarded some speculations in my Analysis of the Vayu Puraria: Journ. 
Asiatic Society of Bengal, December 1832. 




Form Of The Puranas 


The invariable form of the Puranas is that of a dialogue, in which some person 
relates its contents in reply to the inquiries of another. This dialogue is 
interwoven with others, which are repeated as having been held on other 
occasions between different individuals, in consequence of similar questions 
having been asked. The immediate narrator is commonly, though not constantly, 
Lomaharshana or Romaharsharia, the disciple of Vyasa, who is supposed to 
communicate what was imparted to him by his preceptor, as he had heard it from 
some other sage. Vyasa, as will be seen in the body of the work is a generic title, 
meaning an 'arranger' or 'compiler.' It is in this age applied to Krishna 
Dwaipayana, the son of Parasara, who is said to have taught the Vedas and 
Puranas to various disciples, but who appears to have been the head of a college 
or school, under whom various learned men gave to the sacred literature of the 
Hindus the form in which it now presents itself. In this task the disciples, as they 
are termed, of Vyasa were rather his colleagues and coadjutors, for they were 
already conversant with what he is fabled to have taught them and amongst 
them, Lomaharshana represents the class of persons who were especially 
charged with the record of political and temporal events. He is called Suta, as if 
it was a proper name; but it is more correctly a title; and Lomaharshana was 'a 
Suta,' that is, a bard or panegyrist, who was created, according to our text, to 
celebrate the exploits of princes; and who, according to the Vayu and Padma 
Puranas, has a right by birth and profession to narrate the Puranas, in preference 
even to the Brahmans. It is not unlikely therefore that we are to understand, by 
his being represented as the disciple of Vyasa, the institution of some attempt, 
made under the direction of the latter, to collect from the heralds and annalists of 
his day the scattered traditions which they had imperfectly preserved; and hence 
the consequent appropriation of the Puranas, in a great measure, to the 
genealogies of regal dynasties, and descriptions of the universe. However this 
may be, the machinery has been but loosely adhered to, and many of the Patinas, 
like the Vishnu, are referred to a different narrator. 

An account is given in the following work of a series of Paurariik compilations, 
of which in their present form no vestige appears. Lomaharshana is said to have 
had six disciples, three of whom composed as many fundamental Sanhitas, 


whilst he himself compiled a fourth. By a Sanhita is generally understood a 
'collection' or 'compilation.' The Sanhitas of the Vedas are collections of hymns 
and prayers belonging to them, arranged according to the judgment of some 
individual sage, who is therefore looked upon as the originator and teacher of 
each. The Sanhitas of the Puranas, then, should be analogous compilations, 
attributed respectively to Mitrayu, Sansapayana, Akritavrana, and 
Romaharshana: no such Pauranik Sanhitas are now known, The substance of the 
four is said to be collected in the Vishnu Purana, which is also, in another place, 
itself called a Sanhita: but such compilations have not, as far as inquiry has yet 
proceeded, been discovered. The specification may be accepted as an indication 
of the Puranas having existed in some other form, in which they are no longer 
met with; although it does not appear that the arrangement was incompatible 
with their existence as separate works, for the Vishnu Purana, which is our 
authority for the four Sanhitas, gives us also the usual enumeration of the several 
Puranas. 




Footnotes 


20. See 

21. Journ, Royal As. Soc. vol. V. 




Classification Of The Puranas 


There is another classification of the Puranas alluded to in the Matsya Purana, 
and specified by the Padma Purana, but more fully. It is not undeserving of 
notice, as it expresses the opinion which native writers entertain of the scope of 
the Puranas, and of their recognising the subservience of these works to the 
dissemination of sectarian principles.. Thus it is said in the Uttara Kharida of the 
Padma, that the Puranas, as well as other works, are divided into three classes, 
according to the qualities which prevail in them. Thus the Vishnu, Naradiya, 
Bhagavata, Garuda, Padma, and Varaha Puranas, are Satwika, or pure, from the 
predominance in them of the Satwa quality, or that of goodness and purity. They 
are, in fact, Vaishriava Puranas. The Matsya, Kurma, Linga, Siva, Skanda, and 
Agni Puranas, are Tamasa, or Puranas of darkness, from the prevalence of the 
quality of Tamas, 'ignorance,' 'gloom.' They are indisputably Saiva Puranas. The 
third series, comprising the Brahmarida, Brahma-vaivartta, Markandeya, 
Bhavishya, Vamana, and Brahma Puranas, are designated as Rajasa, 'passionate,' 
from Rajas, the property of passion, which they are supposed to represent.. The 
Matsya does not specify which are the Puranas that come under these 
designations, but remarks that those in which the Mahatmya of Hari or Vishnu 
prevails are Satwika; those in which the legends of Agni or Siva predominate are 
Tamasa; and those which dwell most on the stories of Brahma are Rajasa. I have 
elsewhere stated, that I considered the Rajasa Puranas to lean to the Sakta 
division of the Hindus, the worshippers of Sakti, or the female principle; 
founding this opinion on the character of the legends which some of them 
contain, such as the Durga Mahatmya, or celebrated legend on which the 
worship of Durga or Kali is especially founded, which is a principal episode of 
the Markandeya. The Brahma-vaivartta also devotes the greatest portion of its 
chapters to the celebration of Radha, the mistress of Krishna, and other female 
divinities. Col. Vans Kennedy, however, objects to the application of the term 
Sakta to this last division of the Puranas, the worship of Sakti being the especial 
object of a different class of works, the Tantras, and no such form of worship 
being particularly inculcated in the Brahma Purana. This last argument is of 
weight in regard to the particular instance specified, and the designation of Sakti 
may not be correctly applicable to the whole class, although it is to some of the 
series; for there is no incompatibility in the advocacy of a Tantrika modification 


of the Hindu religion by any Purana, and it has unquestionably been practised in 
works known as Upa-puranas. The proper appropriation of the third class of the 
Puranas, according to the Padma Purana, appears to be to the worship of 
Krishna, not in the character in which he is represented in the Vishnu and 
Bhagavata Puranas, in which the incidents of his boyhood are only a portion of 
his biography, and in which the human character largely participates, at least in 
his riper years, but as the infant Krishna, Govinda, Bala Gopala, the sojourner in 
Vrindavan, the companion of the cowherds and milkmaids, the lover of Radha, 
or as the juvenile master of the universe, Jagannatha. The term Rajasa, implying 
the animation of passion, and enjoyment of sensual delights, is applicable, not 
only to the character of the youthful divinity, but to those with whom his 
adoration in these forms seems to have originated, the Gosains of Gokul and 
Bengal, the followers and descendants of Vallabha and Chaitanya, the priests and 
proprietors of Jagannath and Srinath-dwar, who lead a life of affluence and 
indulgence, and vindicate, both by precept and practice, the reasonableness of 
the Rajasa property, and the congruity of temporal enjoyment with the duties of 
religion. 

The Puranas are uniformly stated to be eighteen in number. It is said that there 
are also eighteen Upa-puranas, or minor Puranas; but the names of only a few of 
these are specified in the least exceptionable authorities, and the greater number 
of the works is not procurable. With regard to the eighteen Puranas, there is a 
peculiarity in their specification, which is proof of an interference with the 
integrity of the text, in some of them at least; for each of them specifies the 
names of the whole eighteen. Now the list could not have been complete whilst 
the work that gives it was unfinished, and in one only therefore, the last of the 
series, have we a right to look for it. As however there are more last words than 
one, it is evident that the names must have been inserted in all except one after 
the whole were completed: which of the eighteen is the exception, and truly the 
last, there is no clue to discover, and the specification is probably an 
interpolation in most, if not in all. 

The names that are specified are commonly the same, and are as follows: 1. 
Brahma, 2. Padma, 3. Vaishnava, 4. Saiva, 5. Bhagavata, 6. Narada, 7. 

r r 

Markanda, 8. Agneya, 9. Bhavishya, 10. Brahma-vaivartta, 11. Lainga, 12. 
Varaha, 13. Skanda, 14. Vamana, 15. Kaurma, 16. Matsya, 17. Garuda, 18. 
Brahmanda. This is from the twelfth book of the Bhagavata, and is the same as 



occurs in the Vishnu. In other authorities there are a few variations. The list of 
the K.urma P. omits the Agni Purana, and substitutes the Vayu. The Agni leaves 

r r 

out the Saiva, and inserts the Vayu. The Varaha omits the Garuda and 
Brahmanda, and inserts the Vayu and Narasinha: in this last it is singular. The 
Markandeya agrees with the Vishnu and Bhagavata in omitting the Vayu. The 
Matsya, like the Agni, leaves out the Saiva. 

Some of the Puranas, as the Agni, Matsya, Bhagavata, and Padma, also 
particularize the number of stanzas which each of the eighteen contains. In one 
or two instances they disagree, but in general they concur. The aggregate is 
stated at 400,000 slokas, or 1,600,000 lines. These are fabled to be but an 
abridgment, the whole amount being a krore, or ten millions of stanzas, or even a 
thousand millions. If all the fragmentary portions claiming in various parts of 
India to belong to the Puranas were admitted, their extent would much exceed 
the lesser, though it would not reach the larger enumeration. The former is, 
however, as I have elsewhere stated, a quantity that an individual European 
scholar could scarcely expect to peruse with due care and attention, unless his 
whole time were devoted exclusively for many years to the task. Yet without 
some such labour being achieved, it was clear, from the crudity and inexactness 
of all that had been hitherto published on the subject, with one exception, that 
sound views on the subject of Hindu mythology and tradition were not to be 
expected. Circumstances, which I have already explained in the paper in the 
Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society referred to above, enabled me to avail 
myself of competent assistance, by which I made a minute abstract of most of 
the Puranas. In course of time I hope to place a tolerably copious and connected 
analysis of the whole eighteen before Oriental scholars, and in the mean while 
offer a brief notice of their several contents. 

In general the enumeration of the Puranas is a simple nomenclature, with the 
addition in some cases of the number of verses; but to these the Matsya Purana 
joins the mention of one or two circumstances peculiar to each, which, although 
scanty, are of value, as offering means of identifying the copies of the Puranas 
now found with those to which the Matsya refers, or of discovering a difference 
between the present and the past. I shall therefore prefix the passage descriptive 
of each Purana from the Matsya. It is necessary to remark, however, that in the 
comparison instituted between that description and the Purana as it exists, I 
necessarily refer to the copy or copies which I employed for the purpose of 



examination and analysis, and which were procured with some trouble and cost 
in Benares and Calcutta. In some instances my manuscripts have been collated 
with others from different parts of India, and the result has shewn, that, with 
regard at least to the Brahma, Vishnu, Vayu, Matsya, Padma, Bhagavata, and 
Kurma Puranas, the same works, in all essential respects, are generally current 
under the same appellations. Whether this is invariably the case may be doubted, 
and farther inquiry may possibly shew that I have been obliged to content myself 
with mutilated or unauthentic works. It is with this reservation, therefore, that I 
must be understood to speak of the concurrence or disagreement of any Purana 
with the notice of it which the Matsya P. has preserved. 


Footnotes 


22. As. Res. vol. XVI. 

23. Asiatic Journal, March 1837. 

24. As. Res. vol. XVI. 

25. The names are put attributively, the noun substantive, Purana, being 
understood. Thus Vaishnavam Puranam means the Purana of Vishnu; Saivam 
Puranam, the P. of Siva; Brahmam Puranam, the P. of Brahma. It is equally 
correct, and more common, to use the two substantives p. xv in apposition, as 
Vishnu Purana, Siva Purana, &c. In the original Sanscrit the nouns are 
compounded, as Vishnu-puranam, &c.; but it has not been customary to 
combine them in their European shape. 

26. Journ. Royal As. Soc. vol. V. 

27. I allude to the valuable work of Col. Vans Kennedy, on the Affinity 
between Ancient and Hindu Mythology. However much I may differ from that 
learned and industrious writer's conclusions, I must do him the justice to admit 
that he is the only author who has discussed the subject of the mythology of 
the Hindus on right principles, by drawing his materials from authentic 


sources. 


28. Upon examining the translations of different passages from the Puranas, 
given by Col. Vans Kennedy in the work mentioned in a former note, and 
comparing them with the text of the manuscripts I have consulted, I find such 
an agreement as to warrant the belief that there is no essential difference 
between the copies in his possession and in mine. The varieties which occur in 
the MSS. of the East India Company's Library will be noticed in the text. 




01. The Brahma Purana 


"That, the whole of which was formerly repeated by Brahma to Marichi, is 
called the Brahma Purana, and contains ten thousand stanzas." In all the lists of 
the Puranas, the Brahma is placed at the head of the series, and is thence 
sometimes also entitled the Adi or 'first' Purana. It is also designated as the 
Saura, as it is in great part appropriated to the worship of Surya, 'the sun.' There 
are, however, works bearing these names which belong to the class of Upa- 
purarias, and which are not to be confounded with the Brahma. It is usually said, 
as above, to contain ten thousand slokas; but the number actually occurring is 
between seven and eight thousand. There is a supplementary or concluding 
section called the Brahmottara Purana, and which is different from a portion of 
the Skanda called the Brahmottara Kharida, which contains about three thousand 
stanzas more; but there is every reason to conclude that this is a distinct and 
unconnected work. 

The immediate narrator of the Brahma Purana is Lomaharsharia, who 
communicates it to the Rishis or sages assembled at Naimisharariya, as it was 
originally revealed by Brahma, not to Marichi, as the Matsya affirms, but to 
Daksha, another of the patriarchs: hence its denomination of the Brahma Purana. 

The early chapters of this work give a description of the creation, an account of 
the Manwantaras, and the history of the solar and lunar dynasties to the time of 
Krishna, in a summary manner, and in words which are common to it and several 
other Puranas: a brief description of the universe succeeds; and then come a 
number of chapters relating to the holiness of Orissa, with its temples and sacred 
groves dedicated to the sun, to Siva, and Jagannath, the latter especially. These 
chapters are characteristic of this Purana, and shew its main object to be the 
promotion of the worship of Krishna as Jagannath. To these particulars succeeds 
a life of Krishna, which is word for word the same as that of the Vishnu Purana; 
and the compilation terminates with a particular detail of the mode in which 
Yoga, or contemplative devotion, the object of which is still Vishnu, is to be 
performed. There is little in this which corresponds with the definition of a 
Pancha-laksharia Purana; and the mention of the temples of Orissa, the date of 
the original construction of which is recorded, shews that it could not have been 


compiled earlier than the thirteenth or fourteenth century. 

The Uttara Khanda of the Brahma P. bears still more entirely the character of a 
Mahatmya, or local legend, being intended to celebrate the sanctity of the Balaja 
river, conjectured to be the same as the Banas in Marwar. There is no clue to its 
date, but it is clearly modern, grafting personages and fictions of its own 
invention on a few hints from older authorities. 


Footnotes 


tRWlftfp ijt' wtNnl I -gra 

2g 3 fntt TfMftrf « 

30. Col. Vans Kennedy objects to this character of the Brahma P., and 
observes that it contains only two short descriptions of pagodas, the one of 
Konaditya, the other of Jagannath. In that case, his copy must differ 
considerably from those I have met with; for in them the description of 
Purushottama Kshetra, the holy land of Orissa, runs through forty chapters, or 
one-third of the work. The description, it is true, is interspersed, in the usual 
rambling strain of the Puranas, with a variety of legends, some ancient, some 
modern; but they are intended to illustrate some local circumstance, and are 
therefore not incompatible with the main design, the celebration of the glories 
of Purushottama Kshetra. The specification of the temple of Jagannath, 
however, is of itself sufficient, in my opinion, to determine the character and 
era of the compilation. 

31. See Account of Orissa proper, or Cuttack, by A. Stirling, Esq.: Asiatic 
Res. vol. XV. 

32. See Analysis of the Brahma Purana: Journ. Royal As. Soc, vol. V. 





02. The Padma Purana 


"That which contains an account of the period when the world was a golden 
lotus (padma), and of all the occurrences of that time, is therefore called the 
Padma by the wise: it contains fifty-five thousand stanzas." The second Purana 
in the usual lists is always the Padma, a very voluminous work, containing, 
according to its own statement, as well as that of other authorities, fifty-five 
thousand slokas; an amount not far from the truth. These are divided amongst 

r r r 

five books, or Kharidas; 1. the Srishti Khanda, or section on creation; 2. the 
Bhumi Khanda, description of the earth; 3. the Swarga Khanda, chapter on 
heaven; 4. Patala Khanda, chapter on the regions below the earth; and 5. the 
Uttara Khanda, last or supplementary chapter. There is also current a sixth 
division, the Kriya Yoga Sara, a treatise on the practice of devotion. 

The denominations of these divisions of the Padma P. convey but an imperfect 
and partial notion of their contents. In the first, or section which treats of 
creation, the narrator is Ugrasravas the Suta, the son of Lomahar sharia, who is 
sent by his father to the Rishis at Naimisharariya to communicate to them the 
Purana, which, from its containing an account of the lotus (padma), in which 
Brahma appeared at creation, is termed the Padma or Padma Purana. The Suta 
repeats what was originally communicated by Brahma to Pulastya, and by him to 
Bhishma. The early chapters narrate the cosmogony, and the genealogy of the 
patriarchal families, much in the same style, and often in the same words, as the 
Vishnu; and short accounts of the Manwantaras and regal dynasties: but these, 
which are legitimate Paurariik matters, soon make way for new and unauthentic 
inventions, illustrative of the virtues of the lake of Pushkara, or Pokher in Ajmir, 
as a place of pilgrimage. 

The Bhumi Khanda, or section of the earth, defers any description of the earth 
until near its close, filling up one hundred and twenty-seven chapters with 
legends of a very mixed description, some ancient and common to other Purarias, 
but the greater part peculiar to itself, illustrative of Tirthas either figuratively so 
termed—as a wife, a parent, or a Guru, considered as a sacred object—or places to 
which actual pilgrimage should be performed. 


The Swarga Khanda describes in the first chapters the relative positions of the 
Lokas or spheres above the earth, placing above all Vaikuritha, the sphere of 
Vishnu; an addition which is not warranted by what appears to be the oldest 
cosmology. Miscellaneous notices of some of the most celebrated princes then 
succeed, conformably to the usual narratives; and these are followed by rules of 
conduct for the several castes, and at different stages of life. The rest of the book 
is occupied by legends of a diversified description, introduced without much 
method or contrivance; a few of which, as Daksha's sacrifice, are of ancient date, 
but of which the most are original and modern. 

The Patala Khanda devotes a brief introduction to the description of Patala, the 
regions of the snake-gods; but the name of Rama having been mentioned, Sesha, 
who has succeeded Pulastya as spokesman, proceeds to narrate the history of 
Rama, his descent and his posterity; in which the compiler seems to have taken 
the poem of Kalidasa, the Raghu Vansa, for his chief authority. An originality of 
addition may be suspected, however, in the adventures of the horse destined by 
Rama for an Aswamedha, which form the subject of a great many chapters. 
When about to be sacrificed, the horse turns out to be a Brahman, condemned by 
an imprecation of Durvasas, a sage, to assume the equine nature, and who, by 
having been sanctified by connexion with Rama, is released from his 
metamorphosis, and dispatched as a spirit of light to heaven. This piece of 
Vaishnava fiction is followed by praises of the Sri Bhagavata, an account of 
Krishna's juvenilities, and the merits of worshipping Vishnu. These accounts are 
communicated through a machinery borrowed from the Tantras: they are told by 
Sadasiva to Parvati, the ordinary interlocutors of Tantrika compositions. 

The Uttara Khanda is a most voluminous aggregation of very heterogeneous 
matters, but it is consistent in adopting a decidedly Vaishnava tone, and 
admitting no compromise with any other form of faith. The chief subjects are 

r 

first discussed in a dialogue between king Dilipa and the Muni Vasishtha; such 
as the merits of bathing in the month of Magha, and the potency of the Mantra or 
prayer addressed to Lakshmi Narayaria. But the nature of Bhakti, faith in 
Vishnu—the use of Vaishnava marks on the body—the legends of Vishnu's 
Avataras, and especially of Rama—and the construction of images of Vishnu—are 
too important to be left to mortal discretion: they are explained by Siva to 
Parvati, and wound up by the adoration of Vishnu by those divinities. The 
dialogue then reverts to the king and the sage; and the latter states why Vishnu is 



the only one of the triad entitled to respect; Siva being licentious, Brahma 

r r 

arrogant, and Vishnu alone pure. Vasishtha then repeats, after Siva, the 
Mahatmya of the Bhagavad Gita; the merit of each book of which is illustrated 
by legends of the good consequences to individuals from perusing or hearing it. 
Other Vaishnava Mahatmyas occupy considerable portions of this Khanda, 
especially the Kartika Mahatmya, or holiness of the month Kartika, illustrated as 
usual by stories, a few of which are of an early origin, but the greater part 
modern, and peculiar to this Purana. 

The Kriya Yoga Sara is repeated by Suta to the Rishis, after Vyasa's 
communication of it to Jaimini, in answer to an inquiry how religious merit 
might be secured in the Kali age, in which men have become incapable of the 
penances and abstraction by which final liberation was formerly to be attained. 
The answer is, of course, that which is intimated in the last hook of the Vishnu 
Purana—personal devotion to Vishnu: thinking of him, repeating his names, 
wearing his marks, worshipping in his temples, are a full substitute for all other 
acts of moral or devotional or contemplative merit. 

The different portions of the Padma Purana are in all probability as many 
different works, neither of which approaches to the original definition of a 
Purana. There may be some connexion between the three first portions, at least 
as to time; but there is no reason to consider them as of high antiquity. They 
specify the Jains both by name and practices.; they talk of Mlechchhas, 
'barbarians,' flourishing in India; they commend the use of the frontal and other 
Vaishnava marks; and they notice other subjects which, like these, are of no 
remote origin. The Patala Khanda dwells copiously upon the Bhagavata, and is 
consequently posterior to it. The Uttara Khanda is intolerantly Vaishnava, and is 
therefore unquestionably modern. It enjoins the veneration of the Salagram stone 
and Tulasi plant, the use of the Tapta-mudra, or stamping with a hot iron the 
name of Vishnu on the skin, and a variety of practices and observances 
undoubtedly no part of the original system. It speaks of the shrines of Sri-rangam 
and Venkatadri in the Dekhin, temples that have no pretension to remote 
antiquity; and it names Haripur on the Tungabhadra, which is in all likelihood 
the city of Vijayanagar, founded in the middle of the fourteenth century. The 
Kriya Yoga Sara is equally a modern, and apparently a Bengali composition. No 
portion of the Padma Purana is probably older than the twelfth century, and the 
last parts may be as recent as the fifteenth or sixteenth. 





Footnotes 


r-. r-. i KSjswNaira*^ iwfti««iil “j*i: i w" wm w^rwi 

^ j jnuft? wt ii 

34. See . 

35. One of them, the story of Jalandhara is translated by Col. Vans Kennedy: 
Affinities of Ancient and Hindu Mythology, Appendix D. 

36. The grounds of these conclusions are more particularly detailed in my 
Analysis of the Padma P.: J. R. As. Soc. vol. V. 




03. The Vishnu Purana 


"That in which Parasara, beginning with the events of the Varaha Kalpa, 
expounds all duties, is called the Vaishriava; and the learned know its extent to 
be twenty-three thousand stanzas." The third Purana of the lists is that which has 
been selected for translation, the Vishnu. It is unnecessary therefore to offer any 
general summary of its contents, and it will be convenient to reserve any remarks 
upon its character and probable antiquity for a subsequent page. It may here be 
observed, however, that the actual number of verses contained in it falls far short 
of the enumeration of the Matsya, with which the Bhagavata concurs. Its actual 
contents are not seven thousand stanzas. All the copies, and in this instance they 
are not fewer than seven in number, procured both in the east and in the west of 
India, agree; and there is no appearance of any part being wanting. There is a 
beginning, a middle, and an end, in both text and comment; and the work as it 
stands is incontestably entire. How is the discrepancy to be explained? 


Footnotes 


I TOT? 
tuft ftp i ^ f%ft 
27 WiUTO ft^fvr: II 




04. The Vayaviya Purana 


"The Purana in which Vayu has declared the laws of duty, in connexion with the 
Sweta Kalpa, and which comprises the Mahatmya of Rudra, is the Vayaviya 
Purana: it contains twenty-four thousand verses." The Siva or Saiva Purana is, as 
above remarked, omitted in some of the lists; and in general, when that is the 
case, it is replaced by the Vayu or Vayaviya. When the Siva is specified, as in 
the Bhagavata, then the Vayu is omitted; intimating the possible identity of these 
two works. This indeed is confirmed by the Matsya, which describes the 
Vayaviya Purana as characterised by its account of the greatness of Rudra or 

r r r 

Siva and Balambhatta mentions that the Vayaviya is also called the Saiva, 
though, according to some, the latter is the name of an Upa-puraria. Col. Vans 
Kennedy observes, that in the west of India the Saiva is commonly considered to 
be an Upa or 'minor' Purana. 

Another proof that the same work is intended by the authorities here followed, 
the Bhagavata and Matsya, under different appellations, is their concurrence in 
the extent of the work, each specifying its verses to be twenty-four thousand. A 
copy of the Siva Purana, of which an index and analysis have been prepared, 
does not contain more than about seven thousand: it cannot therefore be the Siva 
Purana of the Bhagavata; and we may safely consider that to be the same as the 
Vayaviya of the Matsya. 

The Vayu Purana is narrated by Suta to the Rishis at Naimisharariya, as it was 
formerly told at the same place to similar persons by Vayu; a repetition of 
circumstances not uncharacteristic of the inartificial style of this Purana. It is 
divided into four Padas, termed severally Prakriya, Upodghata, Anushanga, and 
Upasanhara; a classification peculiar to this work. These are preceded by an 
index, or heads of chapters, in the manner of the Mahabharata and Ramayaria; 
another peculiarity. 

The Prakriya portion contains but a few chapters, and treats chiefly of elemental 
creation, and the first evolutions of beings, to the same purport as the Vishnu, 
but in a more obscure and unmethodical style. The Upodghata then continues the 
subject of creation, and describes the various Kalpas or periods during which the 


world has existed; a greater number of which is specified by the Saiva than by 
the Vaishnava Puranas. Thirty-three are here described, the last of which is the 
Sweta or 'white' Kalpa, from Siva's being born in it of a white complexion. The 
genealogies of the patriarchs, the description of the universe, and the incidents of 
the first six Manwantaras, are all treated of in this part of the work; but they are 
intermixed with legends and praises of Siva, as the sacrifice of Daksha, the 
Maheswara Mahatmya, the Nilakantha Stotra, and others. The genealogies, 
although in the main the same as those in the Vaishnava Puranas, present some 
variations. A long account of the Pitris or progenitors is also peculiar to this 
Purana; as are stories of some of the most celebrated Rishis, who were engaged 
in the distribution of the Vedas. 

The third division commences with an account of the seven Rishis and their 
descendants, and describes the origin of the different classes of creatures from 
the daughters of Daksha, with a profuse copiousness of nomenclature, not found 
in any other Purana. With exception of the greater minuteness of detail, the 
particulars agree with those of the Vishnu P. A chapter then occurs on the 
worship of the Pitris; another on Tirthas, or places sacred to them; and several on 
the performance of Sraddhas, constituting the Sraddha Kalpa. After this, comes a 
full account of the solar and lunar dynasties, forming a parallel to that in the 
following pages, with this difference, that it is throughout in verse, whilst that of 
our text, as noticed in its place, is chiefly in prose. It is extended also by the 
insertion of detailed accounts of various incidents, briefly noticed in the Vishnu, 
though derived apparently from a common original. The section terminates with 
similar accounts of future kings, and the same chronological calculations, that 
are found in the Vishnu. 

The last portion, the Upasanhara, describes briefly the future Manwantaras, the 
measures of space and time, the end of the world, the efficacy of Yoga, and the 
glories of Siva-pura, or the dwelling of Siva, with whom the Yogi is to be united. 
The manuscript concludes with a different history of the successive teachers of 
the Vayu Purana, tracing them from Brahma to Vayu, from Vayu to Vrihaspati, 
and from him, through various deities and sages, to Dwaipayaria and Suta. 

The account given of this Purana in the Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal 
was limited to something less than half the work, as I had not then been able to 
procure a larger portion. I have now a more complete one of my own, and there 



are several copies in the East India Company's library of the like extent. One, 
presented by His Highness the Guicowar, is dated Samvat 1540, or A. D. 1483, 
and is evidently as old as it professes to be. The examination I have made of the 
work confirms the view I formerly took of it; and from the internal evidence it 
affords, it may perhaps be regarded as one of the oldest and most authentic 
specimens extant of a primitive Purana. 

It appears, however, that we have not yet a copy of the entire Vayu Purana. The 
extent of it, as mentioned above, should be twenty-four thousand verses. The 
Guicowar MS. has but twelve thousand, and is denominated the Purvarddha, or 
first portion. My copy is of the like extent. The index also spews that several 
subjects remain untold; as, subsequently to the description of the sphere of Siva, 
and the periodical dissolution of the world, the work is said to contain an 
account of a succeeding creation, and of various events that occurred in it, as the 
birth of several celebrated Rishis, including that of Vyasa, and a description of 

r 

his distribution of the Vedas; an account of the enmity between Vasishtha and 
Viswamitra; and a Naimisharanya Mahatmya. These topics are, however, of 
minor importance, and can scarcely carry the Purana to the whole extent of the 
verses which it is said to contain. If the number is accurate, the index must still 
omit a considerable portion of the subsequent contents. 


Footnotes 


wrpnr?TiBnrjri i 
3Q ipti ii 

39. Commentary on the Mitakshara, Vyavahara Kanda. 

40. As. Joum., March 1837, note. 

41. Analysis of the Vayu Purana: Journ. As. Soc. of Bengal, December 1832. 






05. The Bhagavat Purana 


"That in which ample details of duty are described, and which opens with (an 
extract from) the Gayatri; that in which the death of the Asura Vritra is told, and 
in which the mortals and immortals of the Saraswata Kalpa, with the events that 
then happened to them in the world, are related; that, is celebrated as the 
Bhagavata, and consists of eighteen thousand verses." The Bhagavata is a work 
of great celebrity in India, and exercises a more direct and powerful influence 
upon the opinions and feelings of the people than perhaps any other of the 
Puranas. It is placed the fifth in all the lists; but the Padma Purana ranks it as the 
eighteenth, as the extracted substance of all the rest. According to the usual 
specification, it consists of eighteen thousand slokas, distributed amongst three 
hundred and thirty-two chapters, divided into twelve Skandhas or books. It is 
named Bhagavata from its being dedicated to the glorification of Bhagavat or 
Vishnu. 

The Bhagavata is communicated to the Rishis at Naimisharariya by Suta, as 
usual; but he only repeats what was narrated by Suka, the son of Vyasa, to 
Parikshit, the king of Hastinapura, the grandson of Arjuna. Having incurred the 
imprecation of a hermit, by which he was sentenced to die of the bite of a 
venomous snake, at the expiration of seven days; the king, in preparation for . 
this event, repairs to the banks of the Ganges; whither also come the gods and 
sages, to witness his death. Amongst the latter is Suka; and it is in reply to 
Parikshit's question, what a man should do who is about to die, that he narrates 
the Bhagavata, as he had heard it from Vyasa; for nothing secures final happiness 
so certainly, as to die whilst the thoughts are wholly engrossed by Vishnu. 

The course of the narration opens with a cosmogony, which, although in most 
respects similar to that of other Puranas, is more largely intermixed with allegory 
and mysticism, and derives its tone more from the Vedanta than the Sankhya 
philosophy. The doctrine of active creation by the Supreme, as one with 
Vasudeva, is more distinctly asserted, with a more decided enunciation of the 
effects being resolvable into Maya, or illusion. There are also doctrinal 
peculiarities, highly characteristic of this Purana; amongst which is the assertion 
that it was originally communicated by Brahma to Narada, that all men 


whatsoever, Hindus of every caste, and even Mlechchhas, outcastes or 
barbarians, might learn to have faith in Vasudeva. 

In the third book the interlocutors are changed to Maitreya and Vidura; the 
former of whom is the disciple in the Vishnu Purana, the latter was the half- 

r 

brother of the Kuru princes. Maitreya, again, gives an account of the Srishti-lila, 
or sport of creation, in a strain partly common to the Purarias, partly peculiar; 
although he declares he learned it from his teacher Parasara, at the desire of 
Pulastya referring thus to the fabulous origin of the Vishnu Purana, and 
furnishing evidence of its priority. Again, however, the authority is changed, and 
the narrative is said to have been that which was communicated by Sesha to the 
Nagas. The creation of Brahma is then described, and the divisions of time are 
explained. A very long and peculiar account is given of the Varaha incarnation of 
Vishnu, which is followed by the creation of the Prajapatis and Swayambhuva, 
whose daughter Devahuti is married to Karddama Rishi; an incident peculiar to 
this work, as is that which follows of the Avatara of Vishnu as Kapila the son of 
Karddama and Devahuti, the author of the Sankhya philosophy, which he 
expounds, after a Vaishriava fashion, to his mother, in the last nine chapters of 
this section. 

The Manwantara of Swayambhuva, and the multiplication of the patriarchal 
families, are next described with some peculiarities of nomenclature, which are 
pointed out in the notes to the parallel passages of the Vishnu Purana. The 
traditions of Dhruva, Vena, Prithu, and other princes of this period, are the other 
subjects of the fourth Skandha, and are continued in the fifth to that of the 
Bharata who obtained emancipation. The details generally conform to those of 
the Vishnu Purana, and the same words are often employed, so that it would he 
difficult to determine which work had the best right to them, had not the 
Bhagavata itself indicated its obligations to the Vishnu. The remainder of the 
fifth book is occupied with the description of the universe, and the same 
conformity with the Vishnu continues. 

This is only partially the case with the sixth book, which contains a variety of 
legends of a miscellaneous description, intended to illustrate the merit of 
worshipping Vishnu: some of them belong to the earlystock, but some are 
apparently novel. The seventh book is mostly occupied with the legend of 
Prahlada. In the eighth we have an account of the remaining Manwantaras; in 



which, as happening in the course of them, a variety of ancient legends are 
repeated, as the battle between the king of the elephants and an alligator, the 
churning of the ocean, and the dwarf and fish Avataras. The ninth book narrates 
the dynasties of the Vaivaswata Manwantara, or the princes of the solar and lunar 
races to the time of Krishna. The particulars conform generally with those 
recorded in the Vishnu. 

The tenth book is the characteristic part of this Purana, and the portion upon 
which its popularity is founded. It is appropriated entirely to the history of 
Krishna, which it narrates much in the same manner as the Vishnu, but in more 
detail; holding a middle place, however, between it and the extravagant prolixity 
with which the Hari Vansa repeats the story. It is not necessary to particularize it 
farther. It has been translated into perhaps all the languages of India, and is a 
favourite work with all descriptions of people. 

The eleventh book describes the destruction of the Yadavas, and death of 
Krishna. Previous to the latter event, Krishna instructs Uddhava in the 
performance of the Yoga; a subject consigned by the Vishnu to the concluding 
passages. The narrative is much the same, but something more summary than 
that of the Vishnu. The twelfth book continues the lines of the kings of the Kali 
age prophetically to a similar period as the Vishnu, and gives a like account of 
the deterioration of all things, and their final dissolution. Consistently with the 
subject of the Purana, the serpent Takshaka bites Parikshit, and he expires, and 
the work should terminate; or the close might be extended to the subsequent 
sacrifice of Janamejaya for the destmction of the whole serpent race. There is a 
rather awkwardly introduced description, however, of the arrangement of the 
Vedas and Puranas by Vyasa, and the legend of Markarideya's interview with the 
infant Krishna, during a period of worldly dissolution. We then come to the end 
of the Bhagavata, in a series of encomiastic commendations of its own sanctity, 
and efficacy to salvation. 

Mr. Colebrooke observes of the Bhagavata Purana, "I am inclined to adopt an 
opinion supported by many learned Hindus, who consider the celebrated Sri 
Bhagavata as the work of a grammarian (Vopadeva), supposed to have lived six 
hundred years ago." Col. Vans Kennedy considers this an incautious admission, 
because "it is unquestionable that the number of the Puranas has been always 
held to be eighteen; but in most of the Puranas the names of the eighteen are 



enumerated, amongst which the Bhagavata is invariably included; and 
consequently if it were composed only six hundred years ago, the others must be 
of an equally modern date." Some of them are no doubt more recent; but, as 
already remarked, no weight can be attached to the specification of the eighteen 
names, for they are always complete; each Purana enumerates all. Which is the 
last? which had the opportunity of naming its seventeen predecessors, and 
adding itself? The argument proves too much. There can be little doubt that the 
list has been inserted upon the authority of tradition, either by some improving 
transcriber, or by the compiler of a work more recent than the eighteen genuine 
Puranas. The objection is also rebutted by the assertion, that there was another 
Purana to which the name applies, and which is still to be met with, the Devi 
Bhagavata. 

For, the authenticity of the Bhagavata is one of the few questions affecting their 
sacred literature which Hindu writers have ventured to discuss. The occasion is 
furnished by the text itself. In the fourth chapter of the first book it is said that 
Vyasa arranged the Vedas, and divided them into four; and that he then compiled 
the Itihasa and Puranas, as a fifth Veda. The Vedas he gave to Paila and the rest; 
the Itihasa and Puranas to Lomaharshana, the father of Suta. Then reflecting that 
these works may not be accessible to women, Sudras, and mixed castes, he 
composed the Bharata, for the purpose of placing religious knowledge within 
their reach. Still he felt dissatisfied, and wandered in much perplexity along the 
banks of the Saraswati, where his hermitage was situated, when Narada paid him 
a visit. Having confided to him his secret and seemingly causeless 
dissatisfaction, Narada suggested that it arose from his not having sufficiently 
dwelt, in the works he had finished, upon the merit of worshipping Vasudeva. 
Vyasa at once admitted its truth, and found a remedy for his uneasiness in the 
composition of the Bhagavata, which he taught to Suka his son. Here therefore is 
the most positive assertion that the Bhagavata was composed subsequently to the 
Puranas, and given to a different pupil, and was not therefore one of the eighteen 
of which Romaharshana the Seta was, according to all concurrent testimonies, 
the depositary. Still the Bhagavata is named amongst the eighteen Puranas by the 
inspired authorities; and how can these incongruities be reconciled? 

The principal point in dispute seems to have been started by an expression of 
Sridhara Swamin, a commentator on the Bhagavata, who somewhat incautiously 
made the remark that there was no reason to suspect that by the term Bhagavata 



any other work than the subject of his labours was intended. This was therefore 
an admission that some suspicions had been entertained of the correctness of the 
nomenclature, and that an opinion had been expressed that the term belonged, 
not to the Sri Bhagavata, but to the Devi Bhagavata; to a Saiva, not a Vaishnava, 
composition. With whom doubts prevailed prior to Sridhara Swamin, or by 
whom they were urged, does not appear; for, as far as we are aware, no works, 
anterior to his date, in which they are advanced have been met with. 
Subsequently, various tracts have been written on the subject. There are three in 

r 

the library of the East India Company; the Durjana Mukha Chapetika, 'A slap of 

r 

the face for the vile,' by Ramasrama; the Durjana Mukha Maha Chapetika, 'A 

r r 

great slap of the face for the wicked,' by Kasinath Bhatta; and the Durjana 
Mukha Padma Paduka, 'A slipper' for the same part of the same persons, by a 
nameless disputant. The first maintains the authenticity of the Bhagavata; the 
second asserts that the Devi Bhagavata is the genuine Purana; and the third 
replies to the arguments of the first. There is also a work by Purushottama, 
entitled 'Thirteen arguments for dispelling all doubts of the character of the 
Bhagavata' (Bhagavata swarupa vihsaya sanka nirasa trayodasa); whilst 
Balambhatta, a commentator on the Mitakshara, indulging in a dissertation on 
the meaning of the word Purana, adduces reasons for questioning the inspired 
origin of this Purana. 

The chief arguments in favour of the authenticity of this Purana are the absence 
of any reason why Vopadeva, to whom it is attributed, should not have put his 
own name to it; its being included in all lists of the Puranas, sometimes with 
circumstances that belong to no other Purana; and its being admitted to be a 
Purana, and cited as authority, or made the subject of comment, by writers of 
established reputation, of whom Sankara Acharya is one, and he lived long 
before Vopadeva. The reply to the first argument is rather feeble, the 
controversialists being unwilling perhaps to admit the real object, the promotion 
of new doctrines. It is therefore said that Vyasa was an incarnation of Narayana, 
and the purpose was to propitiate his favour. The insertion of a Bhagavata 
amongst the eighteen Puranas is acknowledged; but this, it is said, can be the 
Devi Bhagavata alone, for the circumstances apply more correctly to it than to 
the Vaishnava Bhagavata. Thus a text is quoted by Kasinath from a Purana—he 
does not state which—that says of the Bhagavata that it contains eighteen 
thousand verses, twelve books, and three hundred and thirty-two chapters. 
Kasinath asserts that the chapters of the Sri Bhagavata are three hundred and 



thirty-five, and that the numbers apply throughout only to the Devi Bhagavata. It 
is also said that the Bhagavata contains an account of the acquirement of holy 
knowledge by Hayagriva; the particulars of the Saraswata Kalpa; a dialogue 
between Ambarisha and Suka; and that it commences with the Gayatri, or at 
least a citation of it. These all apply to the Devi Bhagavata alone, except the last; 
but it also is more true of the Saiva than of the Vaishnava work, for the latter has 
only one word of the Gayatri, dhimahi, 'we meditate;' whilst the former to 
dhimahi adds, Ya nah prachodayat, 'who may enlighten us.' To the third 
argument it is in the first place objected, that the citation of the Bhagavata by 
modern writers is no test of its authenticity; and with regard to the more ancient 
commentary of Sankara Acharya, it is asked, "Where is it?" Those who advocate 
the sanctity of the Bhagavata reply, "It was written in a difficult style, and 
became obsolete, and is lost." "A very unsatisfactory plea," retort their 
opponents, "for we still have the works of Sankara, several of which are quite as 
difficult as any in the Sanscrit language." The existence of this comment, too, 
rests upon the authority of Madhwa or Madhava, who in a commentary of his 
own asserts that he has consulted eight others. Now amongst these is one by the 
monkey Hanuman; and although a Hindu disputant may believe in the reality of 
such a composition, yet we may receive its citation as a proof that Madhwa was 
not very scrupulous in the verification of his authorities. 

There are other topics urged in this controversy on both sides, some of which are 
simple enough, some are ingenious: but the statement of the text is of itself 
sufficient to shew that according to the received opinion of all the authorities of 
the priority of the eighteen Puranas to the Bharata, it is impossible that the Sri 
Bhagavata, which is subsequent to the Bharata, should be of the number; and the 
evidence of style, the superiority of which to that of the Puranas in general is 
admitted by the disputants, is also proof that it is the work of a different hand. 
Whether the Devi Bhagavata have a better title to be considered as an original 
composition of Vyasa, is equally questionable; but it cannot be doubted that the 
Sri Bhagavata is the product of uninspired erudition. There does not seem to be 
any other ground than tradition for ascribing it to Vopadeva the grammarian; but 
there is no reason to call the tradition in question. Vopadeva flourished at the 
court of Hemadri, Raja of Devagiri, Deogur or Dowlutabad, and must 
consequently have lived prior to the conquest of that principality by the 
Mohammedans in the fourteenth century. The date of the twelfth century, 
commonly assigned to him, is probably correct, and is that of the Bhagavata 



Pur aria. 




Footnotes 


wfirfw Tinnrr fnitw tnSfarc i f?i 
(rSPT^rTfESTit I TOSTO fra 
^ ffSwi: i uprated 55^ i 

42 Wl^ira^tfTfrr FrJ)#fffT II 

43. See. 

44. A translation of the ninth, by Capt. Fell, was published in Calcutta in 
different numbers of the Monthly and Quarterly Magazine, in 1823 and 1824. 
The second volume of Maurice's Ancient History of Hindustan contains a 
translation, by Mr. Halhed, of the tenth book, made through the medium of a 
Persian version. 

45. As. Res. vol. VII. 

46. Ancient and Hindu Mythology, note. 

47. Book I. chap. iv. 20-22. 

48. Book I. 7,8. 






06. The Naradiya Purana 


"Where Narada has described the duties which were observed in the Vrihat 
Kalpa, that, is called the Naradiya, having twenty-five thousand stanzas." If the 
number of verses be here correctly stated, the Purana has not fallen into my 
hands. The copy I have analysed contains not many more than three thousand 
slokas. There is another work, which might be expected to be of greater extent, 
the Vrihat Naradiya, or great Narada Purana; but this, according to the 
concurrence of three copies in my possession, and of five others in the 
Company's library, contains but about three thousand five hundred verses. It may 
be doubted, therefore, if the Narada Purana of the Matsya exists. 

According to the Matsya, the Narada Purana is related by Narada, and gives an 
account of the Vrihat Kalpa. The Naradiya Purana is communicated by Narada to 
the Rishis at Naimisharanya, on the Gomati river. The Vrihannaradiya is related 
to the same persons, at the same place, by Suta, as it was told by Narada to 
Sanatkumara. Possibly the term Vrihat may have been suggested by the 
specification which is given in the Matsya; but there is no description in it of any 
particular Kalpa, or day of Brahma. 

From a cursory examination of these Puranas, it is very evident that they have no 
conformity to the definition of a Purana, and that both are sectarial and modern 
compilations, intended to support the doctrine of Bhakti, or faith in Vishnu. With 
this view they have collected a variety of prayers addressed to one or other form 
of that divinity; a number of observances and holidays connected with his 
adoration; and different legends, some perhaps of an early, others of a more 
recent date, illustrative of the efficacy of devotion to Hari. Thus in the Narada 
we have the stories of Dhruva and Prahlada; the latter told in the words of the 
Vishnu: whilst the second portion of it is occupied with a legend of Mohini, the 
will-born daughter of a king called Rukmangada: beguiled by whom, the king 
offers to perform for her whatever she may desire. She calls upon him either to 
violate the rule of fasting on the eleventh day of the fortnight, a day sacred to 
Vishnu, or to put his son to death; and he kills his son, as the lesser sin of the 
two. This shews the spirit of the work. Its date may also be inferred from its 
tenor, as such monstrous extravagancies in praise of Bhakti are certainly of 


modem origin. One limit it furnishes itself, for it refers to Suka and Parikshit, the 
interlocutors of the Bhagavata, and it is consequently subsequent to the date of 
that Purana: it is probably considerably later, for it affords evidence that it was 
written after India was in the hands of the Mohammedans. In the concluding 
passage it is said, "Let not this Purana be repeated in the presence of the 'killers 
of cows' and contemners of the gods." It is possibly a compilation of the 
sixteenth or seventeenth century. 

The Vrihannaradiya is a work of the same tenor and time. It contains little else 
than panegyrical prayers addressed to Vishnu, and injunctions to observe various 
rites, and keep holy certain seasons, in honour of him. The earlier legends 
introduced are the birth of Markarideya, the destruction of Sagara's sons, and the 
dwarf Avatara; but they are subservient to the design of the whole, and are 
rendered occasions for praising Narayaria: others, illustrating the efficacy of 
certain Vaishriava observances, are puerile inventions, wholly foreign to the 
more ancient system of Paurariik fiction. There is no attempt at cosmogony, or 
patriarchal or regal genealogy. It is possible that these topics may be treated of in 
the missing stanzas; but it seems more likely that the Narada Purana of the lists 
has little in common with the works to which its name is applied in Bengal and 
Hindustan. 




Footnotes 


49. 


i fa 

‘ rTfTtfa II 


50. The description of Vishnu, translated by Col. Vans Kennedy (Affinity of 
Ancient and Hindu Mythology) from the Naradiya Purana, occurs in my copy 
of the Vrihat Naradiya. There is no Narada Purana in the East India 
Company's library, though, as noticed in the text, several of the Vrihat 
Naradiya. There is a copy of the Rukmangada Charitra, said to be a part of the 
Sri Narada Purana. 





07. The Markandeya Purana 


"That Purana in which, commencing with the story of the birds that were 
acquainted with right and wrong, every thing is narrated fully by Markandeya, as 
it was explained by holy sages in reply to the question of the Muni, is called the 
Markandeya, containing nine thousand verses." This is so called from its being 
in the first instance narrated by Markandeya Muni, and in the second place by 
certain fabulous birds; thus far agreeing with the account given of it in the 
Matsya. That, as well as other authorities, specify its containing nine thousand 
stanzas; but my copy closes with a verse affirming that the number of verses 
recited by the Muni was six thousand nine hundred; and a copy in the East India 
Company's library has a similar specification. The termination is, however, 
somewhat abrupt, and there is no reason why the subject with which it ends 
should not have been carried on farther. One copy in the Company's library, 
indeed, belonging to the Guicowar's collection, states at the close that it is the 
end of the first Kharida, or section. If the Purana was ever completed, the 
remaining portion of it appears to be lost. 

Jaimini, the pupil of Vyasa, applies to Markandeya to be made acquainted with 
the nature of Vasudeva, and for an explanation of some of the incidents 
described in the Mahabharata; with the ambrosia of which divine poem, Vyasa 
he declares has watered the whole world: a reference which establishes the 
priority of the Bharata to the Markandeya Purana, however incompatible this 
may be with the tradition, that having finished the Purarias, Vyasa wrote the 
poem. 

Markandeya excuses himself, saying he has a religious rite to perform; and he 
refers Jaimini to some very sapient birds, who reside in the Vindhya mountains; 
birds of a celestial origin, found, when just born, by the Muni Samika, on the 
field of Kurukshetra, and brought up by him along with his scholars: in 
consequence of which, and by virtue of their heavenly descent, they became 
profoundly versed in the Vedas, and a knowledge of spiritual truth. This 
machinery is borrowed from the Mahabharata, with some embellishment. 
Jaimini accordingly has recourse to the birds, Pingaksha and his brethren, and 
puts to them the questions he had asked of the Muni. "Why was Vasudeva born 


as a mortal? How was it that Draupadi was the wife of the five Pandus? Why did 
Baladeva do penance for Brahmanicide? and why were the children of Draupadi 
destroyed, when they had Krishna and Arjuna to defend them?" The answers to 
these inquiries occupy a number of chapters, and form a sort of supplement to 
the Mahabharata; supplying, partly by invention, perhaps, and partly by 
reference to equally ancient authorities, the blanks left in some of its narrations. 

Legends of Vritrasura's death, Baladeva's penance, Harischandra's elevation to 

r 

heaven, and the quarrel between Vasishtha and Viswamitra, are followed by a 
discussion respecting birth, death, and sin; which leads to a more extended 
description of the different hells than is found in other Puranas. The account of 
creation which is contained in this work is repeated by the birds after 

r r 

Markandeya's account of it to Kroshtuki, and is confined to the origin of the 
Vedas and patriarchal families, amongst whom are new characters, as Duhsaha 

r 

and his wife Marshti, and their descendants; allegorical personages, representing 
intolerable iniquity and its consequences. There is then a description of the 
world, with, as usual to this Purana, several singularities, some of which are 
noticed in the following pages. This being the state of the world in the 
Swayambhuva Manwantara, an account of the other Manwantaras succeeds, in 
which the births of the Manus, and a number of other particulars, are peculiar to 
this work. The present or Vaivaswata Manwantara is very briefly passed over; 
but the next, the first of the future Manwantaras, contains the long episodical 
narrative of the actions of the goddess Durga, which is the especial boast of this 
Purana, and is the text-book of the worshippers of Kali, Chandi, or Durga, in 
Bengal. It is the Chandi Patha, or Durga Mahatmya, in which the victories of the 
goddess over different evil beings, or Asuras, are detailed with considerable 
power and spirit. It is read daily in the temples of Durga, and furnishes the pomp 
and circumstance of the great festival of Bengal, the Durga puja, or public 
worship of that goddess. 

After the account of the Manwantaras is completed, there follows a series of 
legends, some new, some old, relating to the sun and his posterity; continued to 
Vaivaswata Manu and his sons, and their immediate descendants; terminating 
with Dama, the son of Narishyanta. Of most of the persons noticed, the work 
narrates particulars not found elsewhere. 


This Purana has a character different from that of all the others. It has nothing of 



a sectarial spirit, little of a religious tone, rarely inserting prayers and invocations 
to any deity, and such as are inserted are brief and moderate. It deals little in 
precepts, ceremonial or moral. Its leading feature is narrative, and it presents an 
uninterrupted succession of legends, most of which, when ancient, are 
embellished with new circumstances; and when new, partake so far of the spirit 
of the old, that they are disinterested creations of the imagination, having no 
particular motive; being designed to recommend no special doctrine or 
observance. Whether they are derived from any other source, or whether they are 
original inventions, it is not possible to ascertain. They are most probably, for the 
greater part at least, original; and the whole has been narrated in the compiler's 
own manner, a manner superior to that of the Puranas in general, with exception 
of the Bhagavata. 

It is not easy to conjecture a date for this Purana: it is subsequent to the 
Mahabharata, but how long subsequent is doubtful. It is unquestionably more 
ancient than such works as the Brahma, Padma, and Naradiya Puranas; and its 
freedom from sectarial bias is a reason for supposing it anterior to the 
Bhagavata. At the same time, its partial conformity to the definition of a Purana, 
and the tenor of the additions which it has made to received legends and 
traditions, indicate a not very remote age; and, in the absence of any guide to a 
more positive conclusion, it may conjecturally be placed in the ninth or tenth 
century. 




Footnotes 


51. 


^TWnrfTraiT? I 3tT 
Wti ^ ijffafa ufafaift: i 
fa fafa rw| ffafag i gutf jit! 
ifafigfa) II 


52. A translation into English by a Madras Pandit, Kavali Venkata 
Ramaswami, was published at Calcutta in 1823. 


53. See Vishnu P.,n. 22. 






08. The Agni Purana 


"That Purana which describes the occurrences of the Isana Kalpa, and was 

r r 

related by Agni to Vasishtha, is called the Agneya: it consists of sixteen thousand 
stanzas." The Agni or Agneya Purana derives its name from its having being 

r 

communicated originally by Agni, the deity of fire, to the Muni Vasishtha, for 
the purpose of instructing him in the twofold knowledge of Brahma. By him it 
was taught to Vyasa, who imparted it to Suta; and the latter is represented as 
repeating it to the Rising at Naimisharariya. Its contents are variously specified 
as sixteen thousand, fifteen thousand, or fourteen thousand stanzas. The two 
copies which were employed by me contain about fifteen thousand slokas. There 
are two in the Company's library, which do not extend beyond twelve thousand 
verses; but they are in many other respects different from mine: one of them was 
written at Agra, in the reign of Akbar, in A. D. 1589. 

The Agni Purana, in the form in which it has been obtained in Bengal and at 
Benares, presents a striking contrast to the Markarideya. It may be doubted if a 
single line of it is original. A very great proportion of it may be traced to other 
sources; and a more careful collation —if the task was worth the time it would 
require—would probably discover the remainder. 

The early chapters of this Purana describe the Avataras; and in those of Rama 
and Krishna avowedly follow the Ramayaria and Mahabharata. A considerable 
portion is then appropriated to instructions for the performance of religious 
ceremonies; many of winch belong to the Tantrika ritual, and are apparently 
transcribed from the principal authorities of that system. Some belong to 
mystical forms of Saiva worship, little known in Hindustan, though perhaps still 
practised in the south. One of these is the Diksha, or initiation of a novice; by 
which, with numerous ceremonies and invocations, in which the mysterious 
monosyllables of the Tantras are constantly repeated, the disciple is transformed 
into a living personation of Siva, and receives in that capacity the homage of his 
Guru. Interspersed with these, are chapters descriptive of the earth and of the 
universe, which are the same as those of the Vishnu Purana; and Mahatmyas or 
legends of holy places, particularly of Gaya. Chapters on the duties of kings, and 
on the art of war, then occur, which have the appearance of being extracted from 


some older work, as is undoubtedly the chapter on judicature, which follows 
them, and which is the same as the text of the Mitakshara. Subsequent to these, 
we have an account of the distribution and arrangement of the Vedas and 
Puranas, which is little else than an abridgment of the Vishnu: and in a chapter 
on gifts we have a description of the Puranas, which is precisely the same, and in 
the same situation, as the similar subject in the Matsya Purana. The genealogical 
chapters are meagre lists, differing in a few respects from those commonly 
received, as hereafter noticed, but unaccompanied by any particulars, such as 
those recorded or invented in the Markarideya. The next subject is medicine, 
compiled avowedly, but injudiciously, from the Sausruta. A series of chapters on 
the mystic worship of Siva and Devi follows; and the work winds up with 
treatises on rhetoric, prosody, and grammar, according to the Sutras of Pingala 
and Panini. 

The cyclopaedical character of the Agni Purana, as it is now described, excludes 
it from any legitimate claims to be regarded as a Purana, and proves that its 
origin cannot be very remote. It is subsequent to the Itihasas; to the chief works 
on grammar, rhetoric, and medicine; and to the introduction of the Tantrika 
worship of Devi. When this latter took place is yet far from determined, but there 
is every probability that it dates long after the beginning of our era. The 
materials of the Agni, Purana are, however, no doubt of some antiquity. The 
medicine of Susruta is considerably older than the ninth century; and the 
grammar of Panini probably precedes Christianity. The chapters on archery and 
arms, and on regal administration, are also distinguished by an entirely Hindu 
character, and must have been written long anterior to the Mohammedan 
invasion. So far the Agni Purana is valuable, as embodying and preserving relics 
of antiquity, although compiled at a more' recent date. 

Col. Wilford has made great use of a list of kings derived from an appendix to 
the Agni Purana, which professes to be the sixty-third or last section. As he 
observes, it is seldom found annexed to the Purana. I have never met with it, and 
doubt its ever having formed any part of the original compilation. It would 
appear from Col. Wilford's remarks, that this list notices Mohammed as the 
institutor of an era; but his account of this is not very distinct. He mentions 
explicitly, however, that the list speaks of Salivahana and Vikramaditya; and this 
is quite sufficient to establish its character. The compilers of the Puranas were 
not such bunglers as to bring within their chronology so well known a personage 



as Vikramaditya. There are in all parts of India various compilations ascribed to 
the Puranas, which never formed any portion of their contents, and which, 
although offering sometimes useful local information, and valuable as preserving 
popular traditions, are not in justice to be confounded with the Puranas, so as to 
cause them to be charged with even more serious errors and anachronisms than 
those of which they are guilty. 

The two copies of this work in the library of the East India Company appropriate 
the first half to a description of the ordinary and occasional observances of the 
Hindus, interspersed with a few legends: the latter half treats exclusively of the 
history of Mina. 




Footnotes 


^ A i vtaipN jmr?t i sfgnj 

Dnr. 1®*?" 

55. See . 

56. Analysis of the Agni Purana: Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, 
March 1832. I have there stated incorrectly that the Agni is a Vaishriava 
Purana: it is one of the Tamasa or Saiva class, as mentioned above. 

57. Essay on Vikramaditya and Salivahana: As. Res. vol. IX. 




09. The Bhavishya Purana 


"The Purana in which Brahma, having described the greatness of the sun, 
explained to Manu the existence of the world, and the characters of all created 
things, in the course of the Aghora Kalpa; that, is called the Bhavishya, the 
stories being for the most part the events of a future period. It contains fourteen 
thousand five hundred stanzas." This Purana, as the name implies, should be a 
book of prophecies, foretelling what will be (bhavishyati), as the Matsya Purana 
intimates. Whether such a work exists is doubtful. The copies, which appear to 
be entire, and of which there are three in the library of the East India Company, 
agreeing in their contents with two in my possession, contain about seven 
thousand stanzas. There is another work, entitled the Bhavishyottara, as if it was 
a continuation or supplement of the former, containing also about seven 
thousand verses; but the subjects of .both these works are but to a very imperfect 
degree analogous to those to which the Matsya alludes. 

The Bhavishya Purana, as I have it, is a work in a hundred and twenty-six short 

r r 

chapters, repeated by Sumantu to Satanika, a king of the Paridu family. He 
notices, however, its having originated with Swayambhu or Brahma; and 
describes it as consisting of five parts; four dedicated, it should seem, to as many 
deities, as they are termed, Brahma, Vaishriava, Saiva, and Twashtra; whilst the 
fifth is the Pratisarga, or repeated creation. Possibly the first part only may have 
come into my hands, although it does not so appear by the manuscript. 

Whatever it may be, the work in question is not a Purana. The first portion, 
indeed, treats of creation; but it is little else than a transcript of the words of the 
first chapter of Manu. The rest is entirely a manual of religious rites and 
ceremonies. It explains the ten Sanskaras, or initiatory rites; the performance of 
the Sandhya; the reverence to be shewn to a Guru; the duties of the different 
Asramas and castes; and enjoins a number of Vratas, or observances of fasting 
and the like, appropriate to different lunar days. A few legends enliven the series 
of precepts. That of the sage Chyavana is told at considerable length, taken 
chiefly from the Mahabharata. The Naga Panchami, or fifth lunation, sacred to 
the serpent-gods, gives rise to a description of different sorts of snakes. After 
these, which occupy about one-third of the chapters, the remainder of them 


conform in subject to one of the topics referred to by the Matsya. They chiefly 
represent conversations between Krishna, his son Samba, who had become a 
leper by the curse of Durvasas, Vasishtha, Narada, and Vyasa, upon the power 
and glory of the sun, and the manner in which he is to be worshipped. There is 
some curious matter in the last chapters, relating to the Magas, silent 
worshippers of the sun, from Sakadwipa, as if the compiler had adopted the 
Persian term Magh, and connected the fire-worshippers of Iran with those of 
India. This is a subject, however, that requires farther investigation. 

The Bhavishyottara is, equally with the preceding, a sort of manual of religious 
offices, the greater portion being appropriated to Vratas, and the remainder to the 
forms and circumstances with which gifts are to be presented. Many of the 
ceremonies are obsolete, or are observed in a different manner, as the Rath-yatra, 
or car festival; and the Madanotsava, or festival of spring. The descriptions of 
these throw some light upon the public condition of the Hindu religion at a 
period probably prior to the Mohammedan conquest. The different ceremonies 
are illustrated by legends, which are sometimes ancient, as, for instance, the 
destruction of the god of love by Siva, and his thence becoming Ananga, the 
disembodied lord of hearts. The work is supposed to be communicated by 

r 

Krishna to Yudhishthira, at a great assemblage of holy persons at the coronation 
of the latter, after the conclusion of the great war. 


Footnotes 


TPlffW? I WTTCTO «TT 

58. ‘rfW >ifW n 


59. Col. Vans Kennedy states that he had not been able to procure the 
Bhavishya P., nor even ever to obtain any account of its contents: Anc. and 
Hindu Mythology, note. 





10. The Brahma-Vaivartta Purana 


"That Purana which is related by Savarni to Narada, and contains the account of 
the greatness of Krishna, with the occurrences of the Rathantara Kalpa, where 
also the story of Brahma-varaha is repeatedly told, is called the Brahma- 
vaivartta, and contains eighteen thousand stanzas." The account here given of the 
Brahma-vaivartta Purana agrees with its present state as to its extent. The copies 
rather exceed than fall short of eighteen thousand stanzas. It also correctly 
represents its comprising a Mahatmya or legend of Krishna; but it is very 
doubtful, nevertheless, if the same work is intended. 

The Brahma-vaivartta, as it now exists, is narrated, not by Savarni, but the Rishi 
Narayaria to Narada, by whom it is communicated to Vyasa: he teaches it to 
Suta, and the latter repeats it to the Rishis at Naimisharariya. It is divided into 
four Khandas, or books; the Brahma, Prakriti, Ganesa, and Krishna Janma 
Khandas; dedicated severally to describe the acts of Brahma, Devi, Ganesa, and 
Krishna; the latter, however, throughout absorbing the interest and importance of 
the work. In none of these is there any account of the Varaha Avatara of Vishnu, 
which seems to be intended by the Matsya; nor any reference to a Rathantara 
Kalpa. It may also be observed, that, in describing the merit of presenting a copy 
of this Purana, the Matsya adds, "Whoever makes such gift, is honoured in the 
Brahma-loka;" a sphere which is of very inferior dignity to that to which a 
worshipper of Krishna is taught to aspire by this Purana. The character of the 
work is in truth so decidedly sectarial, and the sect to which it belongs so 
distinctly marked, that of the worshippers of the juvenile Krishna and Radha, a 
form of belief of known modern origin, that it can scarcely have found a notice 
in a work to which, like the Matsya, a much more remote date seems to belong. 
Although therefore the Matsya may be received in proof of there having been a 
Brahma-vaivartta Purana at the date of its compilation, dedicated especially to 
the honour of Krishna, yet we cannot credit the possibility of its being the same 
we now possess. 

Although some of the legends believed to be ancient are scattered through the 
different portions of this Purana, yet the great mass of it is taken up with 
tiresome descriptions of Vrindavan and Goloka, the dwellings of Krishna on 


earth and in heaven; with endless repetitions of prayers and invocations 
addressed to him; and with insipid descriptions of his person and sports, and the 
love of the Gopis and of Radha towards him. There are some particulars of the 
origin of the artificer castes, which is of value because it is cited as authority in 

r 

matters affecting them, contained in the Brahma Kharida; and in the Prakrita and 
Ganesa Khandas are legends of those divinities, not wholly, perhaps, modern 
inventions, but of which the source has not been traced. In the life of Krishna the 
incidents recorded are the same as those narrated in the Vishnu and the 
Bhagavata; but the stories, absurd as they are, are much compressed to make 
room for original matter, still more puerile and tiresome. The Brahma-vaivartta 
has not the slightest title to be regarded as a Purana. 


Footnotes 


60. 




7? 


61. Analysis of the Brahma-vaivartta Purana: Journal of the Asiatic Society of 
Bengal, June 1832. 




11. The Linga Purana 


"Where Maheswara, present in the Agni Linga, explained (the objects of life) 
virtue, wealth, pleasure, and final liberation at the end of the Agni Kalpa, that 
Purana, consisting of eleven thousand stanzas, was called the Lainga by Brahma 
himself." 

The Linga Purana conforms accurately enough to this description. The Kalpa is 
said to be the Isana, but this is the only difference. It consists of eleven thousand 
stanzas. It is said to have been originally composed by Brahma; and the 
primitive Linga is a pillar of radiance, in which Maheswara is present. The work 
is therefore the same as that referred to by the Matsya. 

A short account is given, in the beginning, of elemental and secondary creation, 
and of the patriarchal families; in which, however, Siva takes the place of 
Vishnu, as the indescribable cause of all things. Brief accounts of Siva's 
incarnations and proceedings in different Kalpas next occur, offering no interest 
except as characteristic of sectarial notions. The appearance of the great fiery 
Linga takes place, in the interval of a creation, to separate Vishnu and Brahma, 
who not only dispute the palm of supremacy, but fight for it; when the Linga 
suddenly springs up, and puts them both to shame; as, after travelling upwards 
and downwards for a thousand years in each direction, neither can approach to 
its termination. Upon the Linga the sacred monosyllable Om is visible, and the 
Vedas proceed from it, by which Brahms and Vishnu become enlightened, and 
acknowledge and eulogize the superior might and glory of Siva. 

A notice of the creation in the Padma Kalpa then follows, and this leads to 
praises of Siva by Vishnu and Brahma. Siva repeats the story of his incarnations, 
twenty-eight in number; intended as a counterpart, no doubt, to the twenty-four 
Avataras of Vishnu, as described in the Bhagavata; and both being amplifications 
of the original ten Avataras, and of much less merit as fictions. Another instance 
of rivalry occurs in the legend of Dadhichi, a Muni and worshipper of Siva. In 
the Bhagavata there is a story of Ambarisha being defended against Durvasas by 
the discus of Vishnu, against which that Saiva sage is helpless: here Vishnu hurls 
his discus at Dadhichi, but it falls blunted to the ground, and a conflict ensues, in 


which Vishnu and his partisans are all overthrown by the Muni. 

A description of the universe, and of the regal dynasties of the Vaivaswata 
Manwantara to the time of Krishna, runs through a number of chapters, in 
substance, and very commonly in words, the same as in other Puranas. After 
which, the work resumes its proper character, narrating legends, and enjoining 
rites, and reciting prayers, intending to do honour to Siva under various forms. 
Although, however, the Linga holds a prominent place amongst them, the spirit 
of the worship is as little influenced by the character of the type as can well be 
imagined. There is nothing like the phallic orgies of antiquity: it is all mystical 
and spiritual. The Linga is twofold, external and internal. The ignorant, who 
need a visible sign, worship Siva through a 'mark' or 'type'—which is the proper 
meaning of the word 'Linga'—of wood or stone; but the wise look upon this 
outward emblem as nothing, and contemplate in their minds the invisible, 
inscrutable type, which is Siva himself. Whatever may have been the origin of 
this form of worship in India, the notions upon which it was founded, according 
to the impure fancies of European writers, are not to be traced in even the Saiva 
Puranas. 

Data for conjecturing the era of this work are defective, but it is more of a ritual 
than a Puraria, and the Paurariik chapters which it has inserted, in order to keep 
up something of its character, have been evidently borrowed for the purpose. The 
incarnations of Siva, and their 'pupils,' as specified in one place, and the 
importance attached to the practice of the Yoga, render it possible that under the 
former are intended those teachers of the Saiva religion who belong to the Yoga 
school, which seems to have flourished about the eighth or ninth centuries. It is 
not likely that the work is earlier, it may be considerably later. It has preserved 
apparently some Saiva legends of an early date, but the greater part is ritual and 
mysticism of comparatively recent introduction. 


Footnotes 


62 . 


«r: i 



63. See Asiatic Researches, vol. XVII. 




12. The Varaha Purana 


"That in which the glory of the great Varaha is predominant, as it was revealed to 
Earth by Vishnu, in connexion, wise Munis, with the Manava Kalpa, and which 
contains twenty-four thousand verses, is called the Varaha Purana." 

It may be doubted if the Varaha Purana of the present day is here intended. It is 
narrated by Vishnu as Varaha, or in the boar incarnation, to the personified Earth. 
Its extent, however, is not half that specified, little exceeding ten thousand 
stanzas. It furnishes also itself evidence of the prior currency of some other 
work, similarly denominated; as, in the description of Mathura contained in it, 
Sumantu, a Muni, is made to observe, "The divine Varaha in former times 
expounded a Purana, for the purpose of solving the perplexity of Earth." 

Nor can the Varaha Purana be regarded as a Purana agreeably to the common 
definition, as it contains but a few scattered and brief allusions to the creation of 
the world, and the reign of kings: it has no detailed genealogies either of the 
patriarchal or regal families, and no account of the reigns of the Manus. Like the 
Linga Purana, it is a religious manual, almost wholly occupied with forms of 
prayer, and rules for devotional observances, addressed to Vishnu; interspersed 
with legendary illustrations, most of which are peculiar to itself, though some are 
taken from the common and ancient stock: many of them, rather incompatibly 
with the general scope of the compilation, relate to the history of Siva and 
Durga. A considerable portion of the work is devoted to descriptions of various 
Tirthas, places of Vaishnava pilgrimage; and one of Mathura enters into a variety 
of particulars relating to the shrines of that city, constituting the Mathura 
Mahatmyam. 

In the sectarianism of the Varaha Purana there is no leaning to the particular 

r 

adoration of Krishna, nor are the Rath-yatra and Janmashtami included amongst 
the observances enjoined. There are other indications of its belonging to an 
earlier stage of Vaishnava worship, and it may perhaps be referred to the age of 
Ramanuja, the early part of the twelfth century. 




Footnotes 


f?7( 'BfRpI I ITFTTO 

Ai kfw^uT: I Tr*jt,<ufk 

54 n 

65. One of these is translated by Col. Vans Kennedy, the origin of the three 
Saktis, or goddesses, Saraswati, Lakshmi, and Parvati. Ancient and Hindu 
Mythology. The Tri Sakti Mahatmya occurs, as he gives it, in my copy, and is 
so far an indication of the identity of the Varaha Pur ana in the different MSS. 




13. The Skanda Purana 


"The Skanda Purana is that in which the six-faced deity (Skanda) has related the 
events of the Tatpurusha Kalpa, enlarged with many tales, and subservient to the 
duties taught by Maheswara. It is said to contain eighty-one thousand one 
hundred stanzas: so it is asserted amongst mankind." 

It is uniformly agreed that the Skanda Purana in a collective form has no 
existence; and the fragments in the shape of Sanhitas, Kharidas, and Mahatmyas, 
which are affirmed in various parts of India to be portions of the Purana, present 
a much more formidable mass of stanzas than even the immense number of 
which it is said to consist. The most celebrated of these portions in Hindustan is 
the Kasi Khanda, a very minute description of the temples of Siva in or adjacent 
to Benares, mixed with directions for worshipping Maheswara, and a great 
variety of legends explanatory of its merits, and of the holiness of Kasi: many of 
them are puerile and uninteresting, but some are of a higher character. The story 
of Agastya records probably, in a legendary style, the propagation of Hinduism 
in the south of India: and in the history of Divodasa, king of Kasi, we have an 
embellished tradition of the temporary depression of the worship of Siva, even in 
its metropolis, before the ascendancy of the followers of Buddha, There is every 
reason to believe the greater part of the contents of the Kasi Khanda anterior to 
the first attack upon Benares by Mahmud of Ghizni. The Kasi Khanda alone 
contains fifteen thousand stanzas. 

Another considerable work ascribed in upper India to the Skanda Purana is the 
Utkala Khanda, giving an account of the holiness of Urissa, and the Kshetra of 
Purushottama or Jagannatha. The same vicinage is the site of temples, once of 
great magnificence and extent, dedicated to Siva, as Bhuvaneswara, which forms 
an excuse for attaching an account of a Vaishriava Tirtha to an eminently Saiva 
Purana. There can be little doubt, however, that the Utkala Khanda is 
unwarrantably included amongst the progeny of the parent work. Besides these, 

r r r r 

there is a Brahmottara Khanda, a Reva Khanda, a Siva Rahasya Khanda, a 
Himavat Khanda, and others. Of the Sanhitas, the chief are the Suta Sanhita, 
Sanatkumara Sanhita, Saura Sanhita, and Kapila Sanhita: there are several other 
works denominated Sanhitas. The Mahatmyas are more numerous still. 


According to the Suta Sanhita, as quoted by Col. Vans Kennedy, the Skanda 
Purana contains six Sanhitas, five hundred Khandas, and five hundred thousand 
stanzas; more than is even attributed to all the Puranas. He thinks, judging from 
internal evidence, that all the Khandas and Sanhitas may be admitted to be 
genuine, though the Mahatmyas have rather a questionable appearance. Now one 
kind of internal evidence is the quantity; and as no more than eighty-one 
thousand one hundred stanzas have ever been claimed for it, all in excess above 
that amount must be questionable. But many of the Khandas, the Kasi Khanda 
for instance, are quite as local as the Mahatmyas, being legendary stories relating 
to the erection and sanctity of certain temples or groups of temples, and to 
certain Lingas; the interested origin of which renders them very reasonably 
objects of suspicion. In the present state of our acquaintance with the reputed 
portions of the Skanda Purana, my own views of their authenticity are so 
opposed to those entertained by Col. Vans Kennedy, that instead of admitting all 
the Sanhitas and Khandas to be genuine, I doubt if any one of them was ever a 
part of the Skanda Purana. 




Footnotes 


c tots: i 
i;4i^rdRjia> i siimfafk Jm'i 

66 . 


67. The legend is translated by Col. Vans Kennedy: Ancient and Hindu 
Mythology, Appendix B. 

68. In a list of reputed portions of the Skanda Purana in the possession of my 
friend Mr. C. P. Brown, of the Civil service of Madras, the Sanhitas are seven, 
the Khandas twelve, besides parts denominated Gita, Kalpa, Stotra, &c. In the 
collection of Col. Mackenzie, amongst the Mahatmyas thirty-six are said to 
belong to the Skanda P.: vol. I. p. 6i. In the library at the India House are two 
Sanhitas, the Suta and Sanatkumara, fourteen Khandas, and twelve 
Mahatmyas. 



69. Ancient and Hindu Mythol., note. 




14. The Vamana Purana 


"That in which the four-faced Brahma taught the three objects of existence, as 
subservient to the account of the greatness of Trivikrama, which treats also of the 
Siva Kalpa, and which consists of ten thousand stanzas, is called the Vamana 
Purana." 

The Vamana Purana contains an account of the dwarf incarnation of Vishnu; but 
it is related by Pulastya to Narada, and extends to but about seven thousand 
stanzas. Its contents can scarcely establish its claim to the character of a Purana. 

There is little or no order in the subjects which this work recapitulates, and 
which arise out of replies made by Pulastya to questions put abruptly and 
unconnectedly by Narada. The greater part of them relate to the worship of the 
Linga; a rather strange topic for a Vaishriava Purana, but engrossing the principal 
part of the compilation. They are however subservient to the object of 
illustrating the sanctity of certain holy places; so that the Vamana Purana is little 
else than a succession of Mahatmyas. Thus in the opening almost of the work 
occurs the story of Daksha's sacrifice, the object of which is to send Siva to 
Papamochana tirtha at Benares, where he is released from the sin of 
Brahmanicide. Next conies the story of the burning of Kamadeva, for the 
purpose of illustrating the holiness of a Siva-linga at Kedareswara in the 
Himalaya, and of Badarikasrama. The larger part of the work consists of the 
Saro-mahatmya, or legendary exemplifications of the holiness of Sthariu tirtha; 
that is, of the sanctity of various Lingas and certain pools at Thanesar and 
Kurukhet, the country north-west from Delhi. There are some stories also 
relating to the holiness of the Godavari river; but the general site of the legends 
is in Hindustan. In the course of these accounts we have a long narrative of the 
marriage of Siva with Uma, and the birth of Kartikeya. There are a few brief 
allusions to creation and the Manwantaras, but they are merely incidental; and 
all the five characteristics of a Purana are deficient. In noticing the Swarochisha 
Manwantara, towards the end of the book, the elevation of Bali as monarch of 
the Daityas, and his subjugation of the universe, the gods included, are 
described; and this leads to the narration that gives its title to the Purana, the 
birth of Krishna as a dwarf, for the purpose of humiliating Bali by fraud, as he 


was invincible by force. The story is told as usual, but the scene is laid at 
Kurukshetra. 

A more minute examination of this work than that which has been given to it 
might perhaps discover some hint from which to conjecture its date. It is of a 
more tolerant character than the Purarias, and divides its homage between Siva 
and Vishnu with tolerable impartiality. It is not connected, therefore, with any 
sectarial principles, and may have preceded their introduction. It has not, 
however, the air of any antiquity, and its compilation may have amused the 
leisure of some Brahman of Benares three or four centuries ago. 


Footnotes 


ftfi'ww ^njibst: i far 

ijPR qfaSffw i 

70. 


71. From the extracts from the Vamana Pura translated by Col. Vans Kennedy, 
et seq., it appears that his copy so far corresponds with mine, and the work is 
therefore probably the same: two copies in the Company's library also agree 
with mine. 




15. The Kurma Purana 


"That in which Janarddana, in the form of a tortoise, in the regions under the 
earth, explained the objects of life-duty, wealth, pleasure, and liberation—in 
communication with Indradyumna and the Rishis in the proximity of Sakra, 
which refers to the Lakshmi Kalpa, and contains seventeen thousand stanzas, is 
the Kurma Purana." 

In the first chapter of the Kurma Purana it gives an account of itself, which does 
not exactly agree with this description. Suta, who is repeating the narration, is 
made to say to the Rishis, "This most excellent Kaurma Purana is the fifteenth. 
Sanhitas are fourfold, from the variety of the collections. The Brahmi, 
Bhagavati, Sauri, and Vaishriavi, are well known as the four Sanhitas which 
confer virtue, wealth, pleasure, and liberation. This is the Brahmi Sanhita, 
conformable to the four Vedas; in which there are six thousand slokas, and by it 
the importance of the four objects of life, O great sages, holy knowledge and 
Parameswara is known." There is an irreconcilable difference in this 
specification of the number of stanzas and that given above. It is not very clear 
what is meant by a Sanhita as here used. A Sanhita, as observed above (p. xi), is 
something different from a Purana. It may be an assemblage of prayers and 
legends, extracted professedly from a Purana, but is not usually applicable to the 
original. The four Sanhitas here specified refer rather to their religious character 
than to their connexion with any specific work, and in fact the same terms are 
applied to what are called Sanhitas of the Skanda. In this sense a Purana might 
be also a Sanhita; that is, it might be an assemblage of formulae and legends 
belonging to a division of the Hindu system; and the work in question, like the 
Vishnu Purana, does adopt both titles. It says, "This is the excellent Kaurma 
Purana, the fifteenth (of the series):" and again, "This is the Brahmi Sanhita." At 
any rate, no other work has been met with pretending to be the Kurma Purana. 

With regard to the other particulars specified by the Matsya, traces of them are to 
be found. Although in two accounts of the traditional communication of the 
Purana no mention is made of Vishnu as one of the teachers, yet Suta repeats at 
the outset a dialogue between Vishnu, as the Kurma, and Indradyumna, at the 
time of the churning of the ocean; and much of the subsequent narrative is put 


into the mouth of the former. 


The name, being that of an Avatara of Vishnu, might lead us to expect a 
Vaishnava work; but it is always and correctly classed with the Saiva. Puranas, 
the greater portion of it inculcating the worship of Siva and Durga. It is divided 
into two parts, of nearly equal length. In the first part, accounts of the creation, 
of the Avataras of Vishnu, of the solar and lunar dynasties of the kings to the 
time of Krishna, of the universe, and of the Manwantaras, are given, in general 
in a summary manner, but not unfrequently in the words employed in the Vishnu 
Purana. With these are blended hymns addressed to Maheswara by Brahma and 
others; the defeat of Andhakasura by Bhairava; the origin of four Saktis, 
Maheswari, Siva, Sati, and Haimavati, from Siva; and other Saiva legends. One 
chapter gives a more distinct and connected account of the incarnations of Siva 
in the present age than the Linga; and it wears still more the appearance of an 
attempt to identify the teachers of the Yoga school with personations of their 
preferential deity. Several chapters form a Kasi Mahatmya, a legend of Benares. 
In the second part there are no legends. It is divided into two parts, the Iswara 
Gita and Vyasa Gita. In the former the knowledge of god, that is, of Siva, 
through contemplative devotion, is taught. In the latter the same object is 
enjoined through works, or observance of the ceremonies and precepts of the 
Vedas. 

The date of the Kurma Purana cannot be very remote, for it is avowedly 
posterior to the establishment of the Tantrika, the Sakta, and the Jain sects. In the 
twelfth chapter it is said, "The Bhairava, Varna, Arhata, and Yamala Sastras are 
intended for delusion." There is no reason to believe that the Bhairava and 
Yamala Tantras are very ancient works, or that the practices of the left-hand 
Saktas, or the doctrines of Arhat or Jina were known in the early centuries of our 
era. 




Footnotes 


JWM*Mwnai ^ tothtS i m 
wrwra TRifs: i ^5^jre^r 
^fafa: srawfro i uHi^mijHiR ii 

72. ^’T^s ii 

73. This is also translated by Col. Vans Kennedy (Anc. and Hindu Mythol., 
Appendix D. p. 444); and in this instance, as in other passages quoted by him 
from the Kurma, his MS. and mine agree. 





16. The Matsya Purana 


"That in which, for the sake of promulgating the Vedas, Vishnu, in the beginning 
of a Kalpa, related to Manu the story of Narasinha and the events of seven 
Kalpas, that, O sages, know to be the Matsya Purana, containing twenty 
thousand stanzas." 

We might, it is to be supposed, admit the description which the Matsya gives of 
itself to be correct, and yet as regards the number of verses there seems to be a 
mistatement. Three very good copies, one in my possession, one in the 
Company's library, and one in the Radcliffe library, concur in all respects, and in 
containing no more than between fourteen and fifteen thousand stanzas: in this 
case the Bhagavata is nearer the truth, when it assigns to it fourteen thousand. 
We may conclude, therefore, that the reading of the passage is in this respect 
erroneous. It is correctly said that the subjects of the Purana were communicated 
by Vishnu, in the form of a fish, to Manu. 

The Purana, after the usual prologue of Suta and the Rishis, opens with the 
account of the Matsya or 'fish' Avatara of Vishnu, in which he preserves a king 
named Manu, with the seeds of all things, in an ark, from the waters of that 
inundation which in the season of a Pralaya overspreads the world. This story is 
told in the Mahabharata, with reference to the Matsya as its authority; from 
which it might be inferred that the Purana was prior to the poem. This of course 
is consistent with the tradition that the Purarias were first composed by Vyasa; 
but there can be no doubt that the greater part of the Mahabharata is much older 
than any extant Purana. The present instance is itself a proof; for the primitive 
simplicity with which the story of the fish Avatara is told in the Mahabharata is 
of a much more antique complexion than the mysticism and extravagance of the 
actual Matsya Purana. In the former, Manu collects the seeds of existing things 
in the ark, it is not said how: in the latter, he brings them all together by the 
power of Yoga. 

In the latter, the great serpents come to the king, to serve as cords wherewith to 
fasten the ark to the horn of the fish: in the former, a cable made of ropes is more 
intelligibly employed for the purpose. 


Whilst the ark floats, fastened to the fish, Manu enters into conversation with 
him; and his questions, and the replies of Vishnu, form the main substance of the 
compilation. The first subject is the creation, which is that of Brahma and the 
patriarchs. Some of the details are the usual ones; others are peculiar, especially 
those relating to the Pitris, or progenitors. The regal dynasties are next described; 
and then follow chapters on the duties of the different orders. It is in relating 
those of the householder, in which the duty of making gifts to Brahmans is 
comprehended, that we have the specification of the extent and subjects of the 
Puranas. It is meritorious to have copies made of them, and to give these away 
on particular occasions. Thus it is said of the Matsya; "Whoever gives it away at 
either equinox, along with a golden fish and a milch cow, gives away the whole 
earth;" that is, he reaps a like reward in his next migration. Special duties of the 
householder—Vratas, or occasional acts of piety—are then described at 
considerable length, with legendary illustrations. The account of the universe is 
given in the usual strain. Saiva legends ensue; as, the destruction of Tripurasura; 
the war of the gods with Taraka and the Daityas, and the consequent birth of 
Kartikeya, with the various circumstances of Uma's birth and marriage, the 
burning of Kamadeva, and other events involved in that narrative; the 
destruction of the Asuras Maya and Andhaka; the origin of the Matris, and the 
like; interspersed with the Vaishnava legends of the Avataras. Some Mahatmyas 
are also introduced; one of which, the Narmada Mahatmya, contains some 
interesting particulars. There are various chapters on law and morals; and one 
which furnishes directions for building houses, and making images. We then 
have an account of the kings of future periods; and the Purana concludes with a 
chapter on gifts. 

The Matsya Purana, it will be seen even from this brief sketch of its contents, is 
a miscellaneous compilation, but including in its contents the elements of a 
genuine Purana. At the same time it is of too mixed a character to be considered 
as a genuine work of the Pauranik class; and upon examining it carefully, it may 
be suspected that it is indebted to various works, not only for its matter, but for 
its words. The genealogical and historical chapters are much the same as those of 
the Vishnu; and many chapters, as those on the Pitris and Sraddhas, are precisely 

r r 

the same as those of the Srishti Khanda of the Padma Purana. It has drawn 
largely also from the Mahabharata: amongst other instances, it is sufficient to 
quote the story of Savitri, the devoted wife of Satyavat, which is given in the 



Matsya in the same manner, but considerably abridged. 

Although a Saiva work, it is not exclusively so, and it has no such sectarial 
absurdities as the Kurma and Linga. It is a composition of considerable interest; 
but if it has extracted its materials from the Padma, which it also quotes on one 
occasion, the specification of the Upa-puranas, it is subsequent to that work, and 
therefore not very ancient. 




Footnotes 


7T5 TTfsft' jtstc 

Ml MM I *(V<Wld4ld WT 

gfMtm: i iRnraftfir 
74 . w %fw n 






17. The Garuda Purana 


"That which Vishnu recited in the Garuda Kalpa, relating chiefly to the birth of 
Garuda from Vinata, is here called the Garuda Purana; and in it there are read 
nineteen thousand verses." 

The Garuda Purana which has been the subject of my examination corresponds 
in no respect with this description, and is probably a different work, though 
entitled the Garuda Purana. It is identical, however, with two copies in the 
Company's library. It consists of no more than about seven thousand stanzas; it is 
repeated by Brahma to Indra; and it contains no account of the birth of Garuda. 
There is a brief notice of the creation; but the greater part is occupied with the 
description of Vratas, or religious observances, of holidays, of sacred places 
dedicated to the sun, and with prayers from the Tantrika ritual, addressed to the 
sun, to Siva, and to Vishnu. It contains also treatises on astrology, palmistry, and 
precious stones; and one, still more extensive, on medicine. The latter portion, 
called the Preta Kalpa, is taken up with directions for the performance of 
obsequial rites. There is nothing in all this to justify the application of the name. 
Whether a genuine Garuda Purana exists is doubtful. The description given in 
the Matsya is less particular than even the brief notices of the other Purarias, and 
might have easily been written without any knowledge of the book itself, being, 
with exception of the number of stanzas, confined to circumstances that the title 
alone indicates. 




Footnotes 


75. 


II 




18. The Brahmanda Purana 


"That which has declared, in twelve thousand two hundred verses, the 
magnificence of the egg of Brahma, and in which an account of the future 
Kalpas is contained, is called the Brahmanda Purana, and was revealed by 
Brahma." 

The Brahmanda Purana is usually considered to be in much the same 
predicament as the Skanda, no longer procurable in a collective body, but 
represented by a variety of Kharidas and Mahatmyas, professing to be derived 
from it. The facility with which any tract may be thus attached to the non¬ 
existent original, and the advantage that has been taken of its absence to compile 
a variety of unauthentic fragments, have given to the Brahmanda, Skanda, and 
Padma, according to Col. Wilford, the character of being the Purarias of thieves 
or impostors. This is not applicable to the Padma, which, as above shewn, occurs 
entire and the same in various parts of India. The imposition of which the other 
two are made the vehicles can deceive no one, as the purpose of the particular 
legend is always too obvious to leave any doubt of its origin. 

Copies of what profess to be the entire Brahmanda Purana are sometimes, 
though rarely, procurable. I met with one in two portions, the former containing, 
one hundred and twenty-four chapters, the latter seventy-eight; and the whole 
containing about the number of stanzas assigned to the Purana. The first and 
largest portion, however, proved to be the same as the Vayu Purana, with a 
passage occasionally slightly varied, and at the end of each chapter the common 
phrase 'Iti Brahmanda Purane' substituted for 'Iti Vayu Purane.' I do not think 
there was any intended fraud in the substitution. The last section of the first part 
of the Vayu Purana is termed the Brahmanda section, giving an account of the 
dissolution of the universe; and a careless or ignorant transcriber might have 
taken this for the title of the whole. The checks to the identity of the work have 
been honestly preserved, both in the index and the frequent specification of Vayu 
as the teacher or narrator of it. 

The second portion of this Brahmanda is not any part of the Vayu; it is probably 
current in the Dakhin as a Sanhita or Kharida. Agastya is represented as going to 


the city Kanchi (Conjeveram), where Vishnu, as Hayagriva, appears to him, and, 
in answer to his inquiries, imparts to him the means of salvation, the worship of 
Parasakti. In illustration of the efficacy of this form of adoration, the main 
subject of the work is an account of the exploits of Lalita Devi, a form of Durga, 
and her destruction of the demon Bhandasura. Rules for her worship are also 
given, which are decidedly of a Sakta or Tantrika description; and this work 
cannot be admitted, therefore, to be part of a genuine Purana. 


Footnotes 


76. 


TOTOTUHTinpwfafi'Traw i 
asms fe^iinfira i nffaRf ^ naraf 
i TTpmsymi ^ tout n 


77. As. Res. vol. VIII. 




The Upa-Puranas 


The Upa-purarias, in the few instances which are known, differ little in extent or 
subject from some of those to which the title of Purana is ascribed. The Matsya 
enumerates but four; but the Devi Bhagavata has a more complete list, and 
specifies eighteen. They are, 1. The Sanatkumara, 2. Narasinha, 3. Naradiya, 4. 
Siva, 5. Durvasasa, g. Kapila, 7. Manava, 8. Ausanasa, 9. Varuna, 10. Kalika, 11. 
Samba, 12. Nandi, 13. Saura, 14. Parasara, 15. Aditya, 16. Maheswara, 17. 
Bhagavata, 18. Vasishtha. The Matsya observes of the second, that it is named in 
the Padma Purana, and contains eighteen thousand verses. The Nandi it calls 
Nanda, and says that Kartikeya tells in it the story of Nanda. A rather different 
list is given in the Reva Kharida; or, 1. Sanatkumara, 2. Narasinha, 3. Nanda, 4. 
Sivadharma, 5. Durvasasa, 6. Bhavishya, related by Narada or Naradiya, 7. 
Kapila, 8. Manava, 9. Ausanasa, 10. Brahmarida, 11. Varuna, 12. Kalika, 13. 
Maheswara, 14. Samba, 15. Saura, 16. Parasara, 17. Bhagavata, 18. Kaurma. 
These authorities, however, are of questionable weight, having in view, no doubt, 
the pretensions of the Devi Bhagavata to be considered as the authentic 
Bhagavata. 

Of these Upa-puranas few are to be procured. Those in my possession are the 
Siva, considered as distinct from the Vayu; the Kalika, and perhaps one of the 
Naradiyas, as noticed above. I have also three of the Skandhas of the Devi 
Bhagavata, which most undoubtedly is not the real Bhagavata, supposing that 
any Purana so named preceded the work of Vopadeva. There can be no doubt 
that in any authentic list the name of Bhagavata does not occur amongst the Upa- 
puranas: it has been put there to prove that there are two works so entitled, of 
which the Purana is the Devi Bhagavata, the Upa-puraria the Sri Bhagavata. The 
true reading should be Bhargava, the Purana of Bhrigu; and the Devi Bhagavata 
is not even an Upa-purana. It is very questionable if the entire work, which as far 
as it extends is eminently a Sakta composition, ever had existence. 

The Siva Upa-purana contains about six thousand stanzas, distributed into two 
parts. It is related by Sanatkumara to Vyasa and the Rishis at Naimisharariya, and 
its character may be judged of from the questions to which it is a reply. "Teach 
us," said the Rishis, "the rules of worshipping the Linga, and of the god of gods 


adored under that type; describe to us his various forms, the places sanctified by 
him, and the prayers with which he is to be addressed." In answer, Sanatkumara 
repeats the Siva Purana, containing the birth of Vishnu and Brahma; the creation 
and divisions of the universe; the origin of all things from the Linga; the rules of 
worshipping it and Siva; the sanctity of times, places, and things, dedicated to 
him; the delusion of Brahma and Vishnu by the Linga; the rewards of offering 
flowers and the like to a Linga; rules for various observances in honour of 
Mahadeva; the mode of practising the Yoga; the glory of Benares and other 
Saiva Tirthas; and the perfection of the objects of life by union with Maheswara. 
These subjects are illustrated in the first part with very few legends; but the 
second is made up almost wholly of Saiva stories, as the defeat of Tripurasura; 
the sacrifice of Daksha; the births of Kartikeya and Ganesa the sons of Siva, and 
Nandi and Bhringariti his attendants and others; together with descriptions of 
Benares and other places of pilgrimage, and rules for observing such festivals as 
the Sivaratri. This work is a Saiva manual, not a Purana. 

The Kalika Purana contains about nine thousand stanzas in ninety-eight chapters, 
and is the only work of the series dedicated to recommend the worship of the 
bride of Siva, in one or other of her manifold forms, as Girija, Devi, Bhadrakali, 
Kali, Mahamaya. It belongs therefore to the Sakta modification of Hindu belief, 
or the worship of the female powers of the deities. The influence of this worship 
spews itself in the very first pages of the work, which relate the incestuous 
passion of Brahma for his daughter Sandhya, in a strain that has nothing 
analogous to it in the Vayu, Linga, or Siva Puranas. 

The marriage of Siva and Parvati is a subject early described, with the sacrifice 
of Daksha, and the death of Sati: and this work is authority for Siva's carrying 
the dead body about the world, and the origin of the Pithasthanas, or places 
where the different members of it were scattered, and where Lingas were 
consequently erected. A legend follows of the births of Bhairava and Vetala, 
whose devotion to different forms of Devi furnishes occasion to describe in great 
detail the rites and formulae of which her worship consists, including the 
chapters on sanguinary sacrifices, translated in the Asiatic Researches. Another 
peculiarity in this work is afforded by very prolix descriptions of a number of 
rivers and mountains at Kamarupa-tirtha in Asam, and rendered holy ground by 
the celebrated temple of Durga in that country, as Kamakshi or Kamakhya. It is a 
singular, and yet uninvestigated circumstance, that Asam, or at least the north- 



east of Bengal, seems to have been in a great degree the source from which the 
Tantrika and Sakta corruptions of the religion of the Vedas and Purarias 
proceeded. 

The specification of the Upa-purarias, whilst it names several of which the 
existence is problematical, omits other works, bearing the same designation, 
which are sometimes met with. Thus in the collection of Col. Mackenzie we 
have a portion of the Bhargava, and a Mudgala Purana, which is probably the 
same with the Ganesa Upa-puraria, cited by Col. Vans Kennedy. I have also a 
copy of the Ganesa Purana, which seems to agree with that of which he speaks; 

r r 

the second portion being entitled the Krida Kharida, in which the pastimes of 
Ganesa, including a variety of legendary matters, are described. The main 
subject of the work is the greatness of Ganesa, and prayers and formulae 
appropriate to him are abundantly detailed. It appears to be a work originating 
with the Ganapatya sect, or worshippers of Ganesa. There is also a minor Purana 
called Adi, or 'first,' not included in the list. This is a work, however, of no great 
extent or importance, and is confined to a detail of the sports of the juvenile 
Krishna. 




Footnotes 

78. Mackenzie Collection, 1. 50, 51. 

79. Anc. and Hindu Mythology. 




Synopsis Of The Vishnu Purana 


From the sketch thus offered of the subjects of the Puranas, and which, although 
admitting of correction, is believed to be in the main a candid and accurate 
summary, it will be evident that in their present condition they must be received 
with caution as authorities for the mythological religion of the Hindus at any 
remote period. They preserve, no doubt, many ancient notions and traditions; but 
these have been so much mixed up with foreign matter, intended to favour the 
popularity of particular forms of worship or articles of faith, that they cannot be 
unreservedly recognised as genuine representations of what we have reason to 
believe the Puranas originally were. 

The safest sources for the ancient legends of the Hindus, after the Vedas, are no 
doubt the two great poems, the Ramayana and Mahabharata. The first offers only 
a few, but they are of a primitive character. The Mahabharata is more fertile in 
fiction, but it is more miscellaneous, and much that it contains is of equivocal 
authenticity, and uncertain date. Still it affords many materials that are genuine, 
and it is evidently the great fountain from which most, if not all, of the Puranas 
have drawn; as it intimates itself, when it declares that there is no legend current 
in the world which has not its origin in the Mahabharata. 

A work of some extent professing to be part of the Mahabharata may more 
accurately be ranked with the Pauranik compilations of least authenticity, and 
latest origin. The Hari Vansa is chiefly occupied with the adventures of Krishna, 
but, as introductory to his era, it records particulars of the creation of the world, 
and of the patriarchal and regal dynasties. This is done with much carelessness 
and inaccuracy of compilation, as I have had occasion frequently to notice in the 
following pages. The work has been very industriously translated by M. 
Langlois. 

A comparison of the subjects of the following pages with those of the other 
Puranas will sufficiently shew that of the whole series the Vishnu most closely 
conforms to the definition of a Pancha-lakshana Purana, or one which treats of 
five specified topics. It comprehends them all; and although it has infused a 
portion of extraneous and sectarial matter, it has done so with sobriety and with 


judgment, and has not suffered the fervour of its religious zeal to transport it into 
very wide deviations from the prescribed path. The legendary tales which it has 
inserted are few, and are conveniently arranged, so that they do not distract the 
attention of the compiler from objects of more permanent interest and 
importance. 




Footnotes 


80 . w Hfa * ftsrif i 


'Unconnected with this narrative, no story is known upon earth.' Vol. 307. 




Book One 


The first book of the six, into which the work is divided, is occupied chiefly with 
the details of creation, primary (Sarga) and secondary (Pratisarga); the first 
explaining how the universe proceeds from Prakriti, or eternal crude matter; the 
second, in what manner the forms of things are developed from the elementary 
substances previously evolved, or how they reappear after their temporary 
destruction. Both these creations are periodical, but the termination of the first 
occurs only at the end of the life of Brahma, when not only all the gods and all 
other forms are annihilated, but the elements are again merged into primary 
substance, besides which one only spiritual being exists: the latter takes place at 
the end of every Kalpa, or day of Brahma, and affects only the forms of inferior 
creatures, and lower worlds, leaving the substance of the universe entire, and 
sages and gods unharmed. The explanation of these events involves a description 
of the periods of time upon which they depend, and which are accordingly 
detailed. Their character has been a source of very unnecessary perplexity to 
European writers, as they belong to a scheme of chronology wholly 
mythological, having no reference to any real or supposed history of the Hindus, 
but applicable, according to their system, to the infinite and eternal revolutions 
of the universe. In these notions, and in that of the coeternity of spirit and matter, 
the theogony and cosmogony of the Puranas, as they appear in the Vishnu 
Puraria, belong to and illustrate systems of high antiquity, of which we have only 
fragmentary traces in the records of other nations. 

The course of the elemental creation is in the Vishnu, as in other Puranas, taken 
from the Sankhya philosophy; but the agency that operates upon passive matter 
is confusedly exhibited, in consequence of a partial adoption of the illusory 
theory of the Vedanta philosophy, and the prevalence of the Paurariik doctrine of 
Pantheism. However incompatible with the independent existence of Pradhana 
or crude matter, and however incongruous with the separate condition of pure 
spirit or Purusha, it is declared repeatedly that Vishnu, as one with the supreme 
being, is not only spirit, but crude matter; and not only the latter, but all visible 
substance, and Time. He is Purusha, 'spirit;' Pradhana, crude matter; 'Vyakta, 
'visible form;' and Kula, 'time.' This cannot but be regarded as a departure from 
the primitive dogmas of the Hindus, in which the distinctness of the Deity and 


his works was enunciated; in which upon his willing the world to be, it was; and 
in which his interposition in creation, held to be inconsistent with the quiescence 
of perfection, was explained away by the personification of attributes in action, 
which afterwards came to be considered as real divinities, Brahma, Vishnu, and 
Siva, charged severally for a given season with the creation, preservation, and 
temporary annihilation of material forms. These divinities are in the following 
pages, consistently with the tendency of a Vaishriava work, declared to be no 
other than Vishnu. In Saiva Puranas they are in like manner identified with Siva. 
The Puranas thus displaying and explaining the seeming incompatibility, of 
which there are traces in other ancient mythologies, between three distinct 
hypostases of one superior deity, and the identification of one or other of those 
hypostases with their common and separate original. 

After the world has been fitted for the reception of living creatures, it is peopled 
by the will-engendered sons of Brahma, the Prajapatis or patriarchs, and their 
posterity. It would seem as if a primitive tradition of the descent of mankind 
from seven holy personages had at first prevailed, but that in the course of time it 
had been expanded into complicated, and not always consistent, amplification, 
How could these Rishis or patriarchs have posterity? it was necessary to provide 
them with wives. In order to account for their existence, the Manu 
Swayambhuva and his wife Satarupa were added to the scheme, or Brahma 
becomes twofold, male and female, and daughters are then begotten, who are 
married to the Prajapatis. Upon this basis various legends of Brahma's double 
nature, some no doubt as old as the Vedas, have been constructed: but although 
they may have been derived in some degree from the authentic tradition of the 
origin of mankind from a single pair, yet the circumstances intended to give 
more interest and precision to the story are evidently of an allegorical or 
mystical description, and conduced, in apparently later times, to a coarseness of 
realization which was neither the letter nor spirit of the original legend. 
Swayambhuva, the son of the self-born or untreated, and his wife Satarupa, the 
hundred-formed or multiform, are themselves allegories; and their female 
descendants, who become the wives of the Rishis, are Faith, Devotion, Content, 
Intelligence, Tradition, and the like; whilst amongst their posterity we have the 
different phases of the moon, and the sacrificial fires. In another creation the 
chief source of creatures is the patriarch Daksha (ability), whose daughters, 
Virtues or Passions or Astronomical Phenomena, are the mothers of all existing 
things. These legends, perplexed as they appear to be, seem to admit of 



allowable solution, in the conjecture that the Prajapatis and Rishis were real 
personages, the authors of the Hindu system of social, moral, and religious 
obligations, and the first observers of the heavens, and teachers of astronomical 
science. 

The regal personages of the Swayambhuva Manwantara are but few, but they are 
described in the outset as governing the earth in the dawn of society, and as 
introducing agriculture and civilisation. How much of their story rests upon a 
traditional remembrance of their actions, it would be useless to conjecture, 
although there is no extravagance in supposing that the legends relate to a period 
prior to the full establishment in India of the Brahmanical institutions. The 
legends of Dhruva and Prahlada, which are intermingled with these particulars, 
are in all probability ancient, but they are amplified, in a strain conformable to 
the Vaishriava purport of this Purana, by doctrines and prayers asserting the 
identity of Vishnu with the supreme. It is clear that the stories do not originate 
with this Purana. In that of Prahlada particularly, as hereafter pointed out, 
circumstances essential to the completeness of the story are only alluded to, not 
recounted; shewing indisputably the writer's having availed himself of some 
prior authority for his narration. 


Book Two 


Book Two 

The second book opens with a continuation of the kings of the first Manwantara; 
amongst whom, Bharata is said to have given a name to India, called after him 
Bharata-varsha. This leads to a detail of the geographical system of the Purarias, 
with mount Mem, the seven circular continents, and their surrounding oceans, to 
the limits of the world; all of which are mythological fictions, in which there is 
little reason to imagine that any topographical tmths are concealed. With regard 
to Bharata, or India, the case is different: the mountains and rivers which are 
named are readily verifiable, and the cities and nations that are particularized 
may also in many instances be proved to have had a real existence. The list is not 
a very long one in the Vishnu Purana, and is probably abridged from some more 
ample detail like that which the Mahabharata affords, and which, in the hope of 
supplying information' with respect to a subject yet imperfectly investigated, the 
ancient political condition of India, I have inserted and elucidated. 

The description which this book also contains of the planetary and other spheres 
is equally mythological, although occasionally presenting practical details and 
notions in which there is an approach to accuracy. The concluding legend of 
Bharata—in his former life the king so named, but now a Brahman, who acquires 
true wisdom, and thereby attains liberation—is palpably an invention of the 
compiler, and is peculiar to this Purana. 


The Third Book 


The arrangement of the Vedas and other writings considered sacred by the 
Hindus, being in fact the authorities of their religious rites and belief, which is 
described in the beginning of the third book, is of much importance to the 
history of Hindu literature, and of the Hindu religion. The sage Vyasa is here 
represented, not as the author, but the arranger or compiler of the Vedas, the 
Itihasas, and Puranas. His name denotes his character, meaning the 'arranger' or 
'distributor;' and the recurrence of many Vyasas, many individuals who new 
modelled the Hindu scriptures, has nothing in it that is improbable, except the 
fabulous intervals by which their labours are separated. The rearranging, the 
refashioning, of old materials, is nothing more than the progress of time would 
be likely to render necessary. The last recognised compilation is that of Krishna 
Dwaipayaria, assisted by Brahmans, who were already conversant with the 
subjects respectively assigned to them. They were the members of a college or 
school, supposed by the Hindus to have flourished in a period more remote, no 
doubt, than the truth, but not at all unlikely to have been instituted at some time 
prior to the accounts of India which we owe to Greek writers, and in which we 
see enough of the system to justify our inferring that it was then entire. That 
there have been other Vyasas and other schools since that date, that Brahmans 
unknown to fame have remodelled some of the Hindu scriptures, and especially 
the Puranas, cannot reasonably be contested, after dispassionately weighing the 
strong internal evidence which all of them afford of the intermixture of 
unauthorized and comparatively modern ingredients. But the same internal 
testimony furnishes proof equally decisive of the anterior existence of ancient 
materials; and it is therefore as idle as it is irrational to dispute the antiquity or 
authenticity of the greater portion of the contents of the Puranas, in the face of 
abundant positive and circumstantial evidence of the prevalence of the doctrines 
which they teach, the currency of the legends which they narrate, and the 
integrity of the institutions which they describe, at least three centuries before 
the Christian era. But the origin and developement of their doctrines, traditions, 
and institutions, were not the work of a day; and the testimony that establishes 
their existence three centuries before Christianity, carries it back to a much more 
remote antiquity, to an antiquity that is probably not surpassed by any of the 
prevailing fictions, institutions, or belief, of the ancient world. 


The remainder of the third book describes the leading institutions of the Hindus, 
the duties of castes, the obligations of different stages of life, and the celebration 
of obsequial rites, in a short but primitive strain, and in harmony with the laws of 
Manu. It is a distinguishing feature of the Vishnu Puraria, and it is characteristic 
of its being the work of an earlier period than most of the Purarias, that it enjoins 
no sectarial or other acts of supererogation; no Vratas, occasional self-imposed 
observances; no holidays, no birthdays of Krishna, no nights dedicated to 
Lakshmi; no sacrifices nor modes of worship other than those conformable to the 
ritual of the Vedas. It contains no Mahatmyas, or golden legends, even of the 
temples in which Vishnu is adored. 



The F ourth Book 


The fourth book contains all that the Hindus have of their ancient history. It is a 
tolerably comprehensive list of dynasties and individuals; it is a barren record of 
events. It can scarcely be doubted, however, that much of it is a genuine 
chronicle of persons, if not of occurrences. That it is discredited by palpable 
absurdities in regard to the longevity of the princes of the earlier dynasties must 
be granted, and the particulars preserved of some of them are trivial and 
fabulous: still there is an inartificial simplicity and consistency in the succession 
of persons, and a possibility and probability in some of the transactions which 
give to these traditions the semblance of authenticity, and render it likely that 
they are not altogether without foundation. At any rate, in the absence of all 
other sources of information, the record, such as it is, deserves not to be 
altogether set aside. It is not essential to its credibility or its usefulness that any 
exact chronological adjustment of the different reigns should be attempted. Their 
distribution amongst the several Yugas, undertaken by Sir Wm. Jones or his 
Pandits, finds no countenance from the original texts, farther than an incidental 
notice of the age in which a particular monarch ruled, or the general fact that the 
dynasties prior to Krishna precede the time of the great war, and the beginning of 
the Kali age; both which events we are not obliged, with the Hindus, to place 
five thousand years ago. To that age the solar dynasty of princes offers ninety- 
three descents, the lunar but forty-five, though they both commence at the same 
time. Some names may have been added to the former list, some omitted in the 
latter; and it seems most likely, that, notwithstanding their synchronous 
beginning, the princes of the lunar race were subsequent to those of the solar 
dynasty. They avowedly branched off from the solar line; and the legend of 
Sudyumna, that explains the connexion, has every appearance of having been 
contrived for the purpose of referring it to a period more remote than the truth. 
Deducting however from the larger number of princes a considerable proportion, 
there is nothing to shock probability in supposing that the Hindu dynasties and 
their ramifications were spread through an interval of about twelve centuries 
anterior to the war of the Mahabharata, and, conjecturing that event to have 
happened about fourteen centuries before Christianity, thus carrying the 
commencement of the regal dynasties of India to about two thousand six 
hundred years before that date. This may or may not be too remote but it is 


sufficient, in a subject where precision is impossible, to be satisfied with the 
general impression, that in the dynasties of kings detailed in the Puranas we have 
a record which, although it cannot fail to have suffered detriment from age, and 
may have been injured by careless or injudicious compilation, preserves an 
account, not wholly undeserving of confidence, of the establishment and 
succession of regular monarchies amongst the Hindus, from as early an era, and 
for as continuous a duration, as any in the credible annals of mankind. 

The circumstances that are told of the first princes have evident relation to the 
colonization of India, and the gradual extension of the authority of new races 
over an uninhabited or uncivilized region. It is commonly admitted that the 
Brahmanical religion and civilization were brought into India from without. 
Certainly, there are tribes on the borders, and in the heart of the country, who are 
still not Hindus; and passages in the Ramayaria and Mahabharata and Manu, and 
the uniform traditions of the people themselves, point to a period when Bengal, 
Orissa, and the whole of the Dekhin, were inhabited by degraded or outcaste, 
that is, by barbarous, tribes. The traditions of the Puranas confirm these views, 
but they lend no assistance to the determination of the question whence the 
Hindus came; whether from a central Asiatic nation, as Sir Wm. Jones supposed, 
or from the Caucasian mountains, the plains of Babylonia, or the borders of the 
Caspian, as conjectured by Klaproth, Vans Kennedy, and Schlegel. The affinities 
of the Sanscrit language prove a common origin of the now widely scattered 
nations amongst whose dialects they are traceable, and render it unquestionable 
that they must all have spread abroad from some centrical spot in that part of the 
globe first inhabited by mankind, according to the inspired record. Whether any 
indication of such an event be discoverable in the Vedas, remains to be 
determined; but it would have been obviously incompatible with the Paurariik 
system to have referred the origin of Indian princes and principalities to other 
than native sources. We need not therefore expect from them any information as 
to the foreign derivation of the Hindus. 

We have, then, wholly insufficient means for arriving at any information 
concerning the ante-Indian period of Hindu history, beyond the general 
conclusion derivable from the actual presence of barbarous and apparently 
aboriginal tribes—from the admitted progressive extension of Hinduism into 
parts of India where it did not prevail when the code of Manu was compiled— 
from the general use of dialects in India, more or less copious, which are 



different from Sanscrit—and from the affinities of that language with forms of 
speech current in the western world—that a people who spoke Sanscrit, and 
followed the religion of the Vedas, came into India, in some very distant age, 
from lands west of the Indus. Whether the date and circumstances of their 
immigration will ever be ascertained is extremely doubtful, but it is not difficult 
to form a plausible outline of their early site and progressive colonization. 

The earliest seat of the Hindus within the confines of Hindusthan was 
undoubtedly the eastern confines of the Panjab. The holy land of Manu and the 
Puranas lies between the Drishadwati and Saraswati rivers, the Caggar and 
Sursooty of our barbarous maps. Various adventures of the first princes and most 
famous sages occur in this vicinity; and the Asramas, or religious domiciles, of 
several of the latter are placed on the banks of the Saraswati. According to some 
authorities, it was the abode of Vyasa, the compiler of the Vedas and Puranas; 
and agreeably to another, when on one occasion the Vedas had fallen into disuse, 
and been forgotten, the Brahmans were again instructed in them by Saraswata, 
the son of Saraswati. One of the most distinguished of the tribes of the Brahmans 
is known as the Saraswata and the same word is employed by Mr. Colebrooke to 
denote that modification of Sanscrit which is termed generally Prakrit, and 
which in this case he supposes to have been the language of "the Saraswata 
nation, which occupied the banks of the river Saraswati." The river itself 
receives its appellation from Saraswati, the goddess of learning, under whose 
auspices the sacred literature of the Hindus assumed shape and authority. These 
indications render it certain, that whatever seeds were imported from without, it 
was in the country adjacent to the Saraswati river that they were first planted, 
and cultivated and reared in Hindusthan. 

The tract of land thus assigned for the first establishment of Hinduism in India is 
of very circumscribed extent, and could not have been the site of any numerous 
tribe or nation. The traditions that evidence the early settlement of the Hindus in 
this quarter, ascribe to the settlers more of a philosophical and religious, than of 
a secular character, and combine with the very narrow bounds of the holy land to 
render it possible that the earliest emigrants were the members, not of a political, 
so much as of a religious community; that they were a colony of priests, not in 
the restricted sense in which we use the term, but in that in which it still applies 
in India, to an Agrahara, a village or hamlet of Brahmans, who, although 
married, and having families, and engaging in tillage, in domestic duties, and in 



the conduct of secular interests affecting the community, are still supposed to 
devote their principal attention to sacred study and religious offices. A society of 
this description, with its artificers and servants, and perhaps with a body of 
martial followers, might have found a home in the Brahma-vartta of Manu, the 
land which thence was entitled 'the holy,' or more literally 'the Brahman, region;' 
and may have communicated to the rude, uncivilized, unlettered aborigines the 
mdiments of social organization, literature, and religion; partly, in all probability, 
brought along with them, and partly devised and fashioned by degrees for the 
growing necessities of new conditions of society. Those with whom this 
civilization commenced would have had ample inducements to prosecute their 
successful work, and in the course of time the improvement which germinated 
on the banks of the Saraswati was extended beyond the borders of the Jumna and 
the Ganges. 

We have no satisfactory intimation of the stages by which the political 
organization of the people of Upper India traversed the space between the 
Saraswati and the more easterly region, where it seems to have taken a 
concentrated form, and whence it diverged in various directions, throughout 
Hindustan. The Manu of the present period, Vaivaswata, the son of the sun, is 
regarded as the founder of Ayodhya; and that city continued to be the capital of 
the most celebrated branch of his descendants, the posterity of Ikshwaku. The 
Vishnu Purana evidently intends to describe the radiation of conquest or 
colonization from this spot, in the accounts it gives of the dispersion of 
Vaivaswata's posterity: and although it is difficult to understand what could have 
led early settlers in India to such a site, it is not inconveniently situated as a 
commanding position, whence emigrations might proceed to the east, the west, 
and the south. This seems to have happened: a branch from the house of 
Ikshwaku spread into Tirhut, constituting the Maithila kings; and the posterity of 
another of Vaivaswata's sons reigned at Vaisali in southern Tirhut or Saran. 

The most adventurous emigrations, however, took place through the lunar 
dynasty, which, as observed above, originates from the solar, making in fact but 
one race and source for the whole. Leaving out of consideration the legend of 

r 

Sudyumna's double transformation, the first prince of Pratishthana, a city south 
from Ayodhya, was one of Vaivaswata's children, equally with Ikshvaku. The 
sons of Pururavas, the second of this branch, extended, by themselves or their 
posterity, in every direction: to the east to Kasi, Magadha, Benares, and Behar; 



southwards to the Vindhya hills, and across them to Vidarbha or Berar; 
westwards along the Narmada to Kusasthali or Dwaraka in Guzerat; and in a 
north-westerly direction to Mathura and Hastinapura. These movements are very 
distinctly discoverable amidst the circumstances narrated in the fourth book of 
the Vishnu Purana, and are precisely such as might be expected from a radiation 
of colonies from Ayodhya. Intimations also occur of settlements in Banga, 
Kalinga, and the Dakhin; but they are brief and indistinct, and have the 
appearance of additions subsequent to the comprehension of those countries 
within the pale of Hinduism. 

Besides these traces of migration and settlement, several curious circumstances, 
not likely to be unauthorized inventions, are hinted in these historical traditions. 
The distinction of castes was not fully developed prior to the colonization. Of the 
sons of Vaivaswata, some, as kings, were Kshatriyas; but one, founded a tribe of 
Brahmans, another became a Vaisya, and a fourth a Sudra. It is also said of other 
princes, that they established the four castes amongst their subjects. There are 
also various notices of Brahmanical Gotras, or families, proceding from 
Kshatriya races and there are several indications of severe struggles between the 
two ruling castes, not for temporal, but for spiritual dominion, the right to teach 
the Vedas. This seems to be the especial purport of the inveterate hostility that 

r 

prevailed between the Brahman Vasishtha and the Kshatriya Viswamitra, who, as 
the Ramayana relates, compelled the gods to make him a Brahman also, and 
whose posterity became very celebrated as the Kausika Brahmans. Other 
legends, again, such as Daksha's sacrifice, denote sectarial strife; and the legend 
of Parasurama reveals a conflict even for temporal authority between the two 
ruling castes. More or less weight will be attached to these conjectures, 
according to the temperament of different inquirers; but, even whilst fully aware 
of the facility with which plausible deductions may cheat the fancy, and little 
disposed to relax all curb upon the imagination, I find it difficult to regard these 
legends as wholly unsubstantial fictions, or devoid of all resemblance to the 
realities of the past. 

After the date of the great war, the Vishnu Purana, in common with those 
Puranas which contain similar lists, specifies kings and dynasties with greater 
precision, and offers political and chronological particulars, to which on the 
score of probability there is nothing to object. In truth their general accuracy has 
been incontrovertibly established. Inscriptions on columns of stone, on rocks, on 



coins, decyphered only of late years, through the extraordinary ingenuity and 
perseverance of Mr. James Prinsep, have verified the names of races, and titles 
of princes--the Gupta and Andhra Rajas, mentioned in the Puranas—and have 
placed beyond dispute the identity of Chandragupta and Sandrocoptus: thus 
giving us a fixed point from which to compute the date of other persons and 
events. Thus the Vishnu Puraria specifies the interval between Chandragupta and 
the great war to be eleven hundred years; and the occurrence of the latter little 
more than fourteen centuries B. C., as shewn in my observations on the passage, 
remarkably concurs with inferences of the like date from different premises. The 
historical notices that then follow are considerably confused, but they probably 
afford an accurate picture of the political distractions of India at the time when 
they were written; and much of the perplexity arises from the corrupt state of the 
manuscripts, the obscure brevity of the record, and our total want of the means 
of collateral illustration. 




Footnotes 

81. However incompatible with the ordinary computation of the period that is 
supposed to have elapsed between the flood and the birth of Christ, this falls 
sufficiently within the larger limits which are now assigned, upon the best 
authorities, to that period. As observed by Mr. Mil-man, in his note on the 
annotation of Gibbon (II. 301.) which refers to this subject; "Most of the more 
learned modern English protestants, as Dr. Hales, Mr. Faber, Dr. Russell, as 
well as the continental writers, adopt the larger chronology." To these may be 
added the opinion of Dr. Mill, who, for reasons which he has fully detailed, 
identifies the commencement of the Kali age of the Hindus, B. C. 3102, with 
the era of the deluge. Christa Sangita, Introd., supplementary note. 

82. Sir Wm. Jones on the Hindus (As. Res. vol. III.); Klaproth. Asia 
Polyglotta; Vans Kennedy on the Origin of Languages; A von Schlegel 
Origines des Hindous (Trans. R. Soc. of Literature). 


83. See. note. 


84. As. Res. vol. V. 


85. As. Res. vol. VII. 

86. See &c. 

87. n. 81. 




The Fifth Book 


The fifth book of the Vishnu Purana is exclusively occupied with the life of 
Krishna. This is one of the distinguishing characteristics of the Purana, and is 
one argument against its antiquity. It is possible, though not yet proved, that 
Krishna as an Avatara of Vishnu, is mentioned in an indisputably genuine text of 
the Vedas. He is conspicuously prominent in the Mahabharata, but very 
contradictorily described there. The part that he usually performs is that of a 
mere mortal, although the passages are numerous that attach divinity to his 
person. There are, however, no descriptions in the Mahabharata of his juvenile 
frolics, of his sports in Vrindavan, his pastimes with the cow-boys, or even his 
destruction of the Asuras sent to kill him. These stories have all a modern 
complexion: they do not harmonize with the tone of the ancient legends, which 
is generally grave, and sometimes majestic: they are the creations of a puerile 
taste, and grovelling imagination. These Chapters of the Vishnu Purana offer 
some difficulties as to their originality: they are the same as those on the same 
subject in the Brahma Purana: they are not very dissimilar to those of the 
Bhagavata. The latter has some incidents which the Vishnu has not, and may 
therefore be thought to have improved upon the prior narrative of the latter. On 
the other hand, abridgment is equally a proof of posteriority as amplification. 
The simpler style of the Vishnu Purana is however in favour of its priority; and 
the miscellaneous composition of the Brahma Purana renders it likely to have 
borrowed these chapters from the Vishnu. The life of Krishna in the Hari-vansa 
and the Brahma-vaivartta are indisputably of later date. 


The Sixth Book 


The last book contains an account of the dissolution of the world, in both its 
major and minor cataclysms; and in the particulars of the end of all things by fire 
and water, as well as in the principle of their perpetual renovation, presents a 
faithful exhibition of opinions that were general in the ancient world. The 
metaphysical annihilation of the universe, by the release of the spirit from bodily 
existence, offers, as already remarked, other analogies to doctrines and practices 
taught by Pythagoras and Plato, and by the Platonic Christians of later days. 


Footnotes 

88. Burnet has collected the opinions of the ancient world on this subject, 
tracing them, as he says, "to the earliest people, and the first appearances of 
wisdom, after the flood." The Hindu account explains what is imperfect or 
contradictory in ancient tradition, as handed down from other and less 
carefully perpetuated sources. Theory of the Earth, b. III. c. 3. 




Date Of The Vishnu purana 


The Vishnu Purana has kept very clear of particulars from which an 
approximation to its date may be conjectured. No place is described of which the 
sacredness has any known limit, nor any work cited of probable recent 
composition. The Vedas, the Purarias, other works forming the body of Sanscrit 
literature, are named; and so is the Mahabharata, to which therefore it is 
subsequent. Both Bauddhas and Jains are adverted to. It was therefore written 
before the former had disappeared; but they existed in some parts of India as late 
as the twelfth century at least; and it is probable that the Purana was compiled 
before that period. The Gupta kings reigned in the seventh century; the historical 
record of the Purana which mentions them was therefore later: and there seems 
little doubt that the same alludes to the first incursions of the Mohammedans, 
which took place in the eighth century; which brings it still lower. In describing 
the latter dynasties, some, if not all, of which were no doubt contemporary, they 
are described as reigning altogether one thousand seven hundred and ninety-six 
years. Why this duration should have been chosen does not appear, unless, in 
conjunction with the number of years which are said to have elapsed between the 
great war and the last of the Andhra dynasty, which preceded these different 
races, and which amounted to two thousand three hundred and fifty, the compiler 
was influenced by the actual date at which he wrote. The aggregate of the two 
periods would be the Kali year 4146, equivalent to A. D. 1045. There are some 
variety and indistinctness in the enumeration of the periods which compose this 
total, but the date which results from it is not unlikely to be an approximation to 
that of the Vishnu Purana. 

It is the boast of inductive philosophy, that it draws its conclusions from the 
careful observation and accumulation of facts; and it is equally the business of 
all philosophical research to determine its facts before it ventures upon 
speculation. This procedure has not been observed in the investigation of the 
mythology and traditions of the Hindus. Impatience to generalize has availed 
itself greedily of whatever promised to afford materials for generalization; and 
the most erroneous views have been confidently advocated, because the guides 
to which their authors trusted were ignorant or insufficient. The information 
gleaned by Sir Wm. Jones was gathered in an early season of Sanscrit study, 


before the field was cultivated. The same may be said of the writings of Paulinus 
a St. Barolomaeo, with the further disadvantage of his having been imperfectly 
acquainted with the Sanscrit language and literature, and his veiling his 
deficiencies under loftiness of pretension and a prodigal display of misapplied 
erudition. The documents to which Wilford trusted proved to be in great part 
fabrications, and where genuine, were mixed up with so much loose and 
unauthenticated matter, and so overwhelmed with extravagance of speculation, 
that his citations need to be carefully and skilfully sifted, before they can be 
serviceably employed. The descriptions of Ward are too deeply tinctured by his 
prejudices to be implicitly confided in; and they are also derived in a great 
measure from the oral or written communications of Bengali pandits, who are 
not in general very deeply read in the authorities of their mythology. The 
accounts of Polier were in like manner collected from questionable sources, and 
his Mythologie des Hindous presents a heterogeneous mixture of popular and 
Paurariik tales, of ancient traditions, and legends apparently invented for the 
occasion, which renders the publication worse than useless, except in the hands 
of those who can distinguish the pure metal from the alloy. Such are the 
authorities to which Maurice, Faber, and Creuzer have exclusively trusted in 
their description of the Hindu mythology, and it is no marvel that there should 
have been an utter confounding of good and bad in their selection of materials, 
and an inextricable mixture of truth and error in their conclusions. Their labours 
accordingly are far from entitled to that confidence which their learning and 
industry would else have secured; and a sound and comprehensive survey of the 
Hindu system is still wanting to the comparative analysis of the religious 
opinions of the ancient world, and to a satisfactory elucidation of an important 
chapter in the history of the human race. It is with the hope of supplying some of 
the necessary means for the accomplishment of these objects, that the following 
pages have been translated. 




Footnotes 


89. Systema Brahmanicum, &c. 


90. Asiatic Researches. 


91. Account of the Hindus. 


92. Mythologie des Hindous, edited by Canoness Polier. 




Conclusion 


The translation of the Vishnu Puraria has been made from a collation of various 
manuscripts in my possession. I had three when I commenced the work, two in 
the Devanagari, and one in the Bengali character: a fourth, from the west of 
India, was given to me by Major Jervis, when some progress had been made: and 
in conducting the latter half of the translation through the press, I have compared 
it with three other copies in the library of the East India Company. All these 
copies closely agree; presenting no other differences than occasional varieties of 
reading, owing chiefly to the inattention or inaccuracy of the transcriber. Four of 
the copies were accompanied by a commentary, essentially the sane, although 
occasionally varying; and ascribed, in part at least, to two different scholiasts. 
The annotations on the first two books and the fifth are in two MSS. said to be 
the work of Sridhara Yati, the disciple of Parananda, and who is therefore the 
same as Sridhara Swami, the commentator on the Bhagavata. In the other three 
books these two MSS. concur with other two in naming the commentator 
Ratnagarbha Bhatta, who in those two is the author of the notes on the entire 
work. The introductory verses of his comment specify him to be the disciple of 
Vidya-vachaspati, the son of Hirariyagarbha, and grandson of Madhava, who 
composed his commentary by desire of Suryakara, son of Ratinath, Misra, son of 
Chandrakara, hereditary ministers of some sovereign who is not particularized. 
In the illustrations which are attributed to these different writers there is so much 
conformity, that one or other is largely indebted to his predecessor. They both 
refer to earlier commentaries. Sridhara cites the works of Chit-sukha-yoni and 
others, both more extensive and more concise; between which, his own, which 
he terms Atma- or Swa-prakasa, 'self-illuminator,' holds an intermediate 
character. Ratnagarbha entitles his, Vaishriavakuta chandrika, 'the moonlight of 
devotion to Vishnu.' The dates of these commentators are not ascertainable, as 
far as I am aware, from any of the particulars which they have specified. 

In the notes which I have added to the translation, I have been desirous chiefly of 
comparing the statements of the text with those of other Purarias, and pointing 
out the circumstances in which they differ or agree; so as to render the present 
publication a sort of concordance to the whole, as it is not very probable that 
many of them will be published or translated. The Index that follows has been 


made sufficiently copious to answer the purposes of a mythological and 
historical dictionary, as far as the Puranas, or the greater number of them, 
furnish, materials. 

In rendering the text into English, I have adhered to it as literally as was 
compatible with some regard to the usages of English composition. In general 
the original presents few difficulties. The style of the Puranas is very commonly 
humble and easy, and the narrative is plainly and unpretendingly told. In the 
addresses to the deities, in the expatiations upon the divine nature, in the 
descriptions of the universe, and in argumentative and metaphysical discussion, 
there occur passages in which the difficulty arising from the subject itself is 
enhanced by the brief and obscure manner in which it is treated. On such 
occasions I derived much aid from the commentary, but it is possible that I may 
have sometimes misapprehended and misrepresented the original; and it is also 
possible that I may have sometimes failed to express its purport with sufficient 
precision to have made it intelligible. I trust, however, that this will not often be 
the case, and that the translation of the Vishnu Purana will be of service and of 
interest to the few, who in these times of utilitarian selfishness, conflicting 
opinion, party virulence, and political agitation, can find a restingplace for their 
thoughts in the tranquil contemplation of those yet living pictures of the ancient 
world which are exhibited by the literature and mythology of the Hindus. 



The Vishnu Purana-Book 1 


01. Chapter 
02. Chapter 
03. Chapter 
04. Chapter 
05. Chapter 
06. Chapter 
07. Chapter 
08. Chapter 

Sacrifice Of Daksha (From the Vayu Purana) 
09. Chapter 

10. Chapter 

11. Chapter 

12. Chapter 

13. Chapter 

14. Chapter 

15. Chapter 

16. Chapter 

17. Chapter 

18. Chapter 

19. Chapter 

20. Chapter 

21. Chapter 

22. Chapter 




01. Chapter 


Invocation. Maitreya inquires of his teacher, Parasara, the origin and nature of 
the universe. Parasara performs a rite to destroy the demons: reproved by 
Vasishtha, he desists: Pulastya appears, and bestows upon him divine 
knowledge: he repeats the Vishnu Purana. Vishnu the origin, existence, and end 
of all things. 

OM! GLORY TO VASUDEVA.—Victory be to thee, Puridarikaksha; adoration 
be to thee, Viswabhavana; glory be to thee, Hrishikesa, Mahapurusha, and 
Purvaja. 

May that Vishnu, who is the existent, imperishable, Brahma, who is Iswara, who 
is spirit who with the three qualities is the cause of creation, preservation, and 
destruction; who is the parent of nature, intellect, and the other ingredients of the 
universe be to us the bestower of understanding, wealth, and final emancipation. 

Having adored Vishnu, the lord of all, and paid reverence to Brahma and the rest 
having also saluted the spiritual preceptor I will narrate a Purana equal in 
sanctity to the Vedas. 

Maitreya, having saluted him reverentially, thus addressed Parasara, the 
excellent sage, the grandson of Vasishtha, who was versed in traditional history, 
and the Puranas; who was acquainted with the Vedas, and the branches of 
science dependent upon them; and skilled in law and philosophy; and who had 
performed the morning rites of devotion. 

Maitreya said, Master! I have been instructed by you in the whole of the Vedas, 
and in the institutes of law and of sacred science: through your favour, other 
men, even though they be my foes, cannot accuse me of having been remiss in 
the acquirement of knowledge. I am now desirous, oh thou who art profound in 
piety! to hear from thee, how this world was, and how in future it will be? what 
is its substance, oh Brahman, and whence proceeded animate and inanimate 
things? into what has it been resolved, and into what will its dissolution again 
occur? how were the elements manifested? whence proceeded the gods and other 


beings? what are the situation and extent of the oceans and the mountains, the 
earth, the sun, and the planets? what are the families of the gods and others, the 
Menus, the periods called Manwantaras, those termed Kalpas, and their 
subdivisions, and the four ages: the events that happen at the close of a Kalpa, 
and the terminations of the several ages the histories, oh great Muni, of the gods, 
the sages, and kings; and how the Vedas were divided into branches (or schools), 
after they had been arranged by Vyasa: the duties of the Brahmans, and the other 
tribes, as well as of those who pass through the different orders of life? All these 

r 

things I wish to hear from you, grandson of Vasishtha. Incline thy thoughts 
benevolently towards me, that I may, through thy favour, be informed of all I 
desire to know. 

Parasara replied, Well inquired, pious Maitreya. You recall to my recollection 

r 

that which was of old narrated by my father's father, Vasishtha. I had heard that 
my father had been devoured by a Rakshas employed by Viswamitra: violent 
anger seized me, and I commenced a sacrifice for the destruction of the 
Rakshasas: hundreds of them were reduced to ashes by the rite, when, as they 

r 

were about to be entirely extirpated, my grandfather Vasishtha thus spake to me: 
Enough, my child; let thy wrath be appeased: the Rakshasas are not culpable: thy 
father's death was the work of destiny. Anger is the passion of fools; it becometh 
not a wise man. By whom, it may be asked, is any one killed? Every man reaps 
the consequences of his own acts. Anger, my son, is the destruction of all that 
man obtains by arduous exertions, of fame, and of devout austerities; and 
prevents the attainment of heaven or of emancipation. The chief sages always 
shun wrath: he not thou, my child, subject to its influence. Let no more of these 
unoffending spirits of darkness be consumed. Mercy is the might of the 
righteous. 

Being thus admonished by my venerable grandsire, I immediately desisted from 

r 

the rite, in obedience to his injunctions, and Vasishtha, the most excellent of 
sages, was content with me. Then arrived Pulastya, the son of Brahma, who was 
received by my grandfather with the customary marks of respect. The illustrious 
brother of Pulaha said to me; Since, in the violence of animosity, you have 
listened to the words of your progenitor, and have exercised clemency, therefore 
you shall become learned in every science: since you have forborne, even though 
incensed, to destroy my posterity, I will bestow upon you another boon, and, you 
shall become the author of a summary of the Purarias you shall know the true 



nature of the deities, as it really is; and, whether engaged in religious rites, or 
abstaining from their performance, your understanding, through my favour, shall 
be perfect, and exempt from), doubts. Then my grandsire Vasishtha added; 
Whatever has been said to thee by Pulastya, shall assuredly come to pass. 

Now truly all that was told me formerly by Vasishtha, and by the wise Palastya, 
has been brought to my recollection by your questions, and I will relate to you 
the whole, even all you have asked. Listen to the complete compendium of the 
Pur pas, according to its tenour. The world was produced from Vishnu: it exists 
in him: he is the cause of its continuance and cessation: he is the world. 


Footnotes 

01. An address of this kind, to one or other Hindu divinity, usually introduces 
Sanscrit compositions, especially those considered sacred. The first term 
of this mantra or brief prayer, Om or Omkara, is well known as a 
combination of letters invested by Hindu mysticism with peculiar 
sanctity. In the Vedas it is said to comprehend all the gods; and in the 
Puranas it is directed to be prefixed to all such formulae as that of the 
text. Thus in the Uttara Khanda of the Padma Purana: 'The syllable Om, 
the mysterious name, or Brahma, is the leader of all prayers: let it 
therefore, O lovely-faced, (Siva addresses Durga,) be employed in the 
beginning of all prayers:' According to the same authority, one of the 
mystical imports of the term is the collective enunciation of Vishnu 
expressed by A, of Sri his bride intimated by U, and of their joint 
worshipper designated by M. A whole chapter of the Vayu Purana is 
devoted to this term. A text of the Vedas is there cited: 'Om, the 
monosyllable Brahma;' the latter meaning either the Supreme Being or 
the Vedas collectively, of which this monosyllable is the type. It is also 
said to typify the three spheres of the world, the three holy fires, the three 
steps of Vishnu, &c.~Frequent meditation upon it, and repetition of it, 
ensure release from worldly existence. See also Manu, II. 76. Vasudeva, 
a name of Vishnu or Krishna, is, according to its grammatical etymology, 
a patronymic derivative implying son of Vasudeva. The Vaishnava 


Purarias, however, devise other explanations: see the next chapter, and 
again, b. VI. c. 5. 

02. In this stanza occurs a series of the appellations of Vishnu: 1. 
Pundarikaksha, having eyes like a lotus, or heart-pervading; or Puridarika 
is explained supreme glory, and Aksha imperishable: the first is the most 
usual etymon. 2. Viswabhavana, the creator of the universe, or the cause 
of the existence of all things. 3. Hrishikesa, lord of the senses. 4. Maha 
pumsha, great or supreme spirit; purusha meaning that which abides or is 
quiescent in body (puri sete), 5. Purvaja, produced or appearing before 
creation; the Orphic npcoioyovoc;. In the fifth book, c. 18, Vishnu is 
described by five appellations, which are considered analogous to these; 
or, 1. Bhutatma, one with created things, or Pundarikaksha; 2. 
Pradhanatma, one with crude nature, or Viswabhavana; 3. Indriyatma, 
one with the senses, or Hrishikesa; 4. Paramatma, supreme spirit, or 
Mahapurusha; and Atma, soul; living soul, animating nature and existing 
before it, or Purvaja. 

03. Brahma, in the neuter form, is abstract supreme spirit; and Iswara is the 
Deity in his active nature, he who is able to do or leave undone, or to do 
any thing in any other manner than that in which it is done. 

04. Puman which is the same with Pumsha, incorporated spirit. By this and 
the two preceding terms also the commentator understands the text to 
signify that Vishnu is any form of spiritual being that is acknowledged by 
different philosophical systems, or that he is the Brahma of the Vedanta, 
the Iswara of the Patanjala, and the Purusha of the Sankhya school. 

05. The three qualities, to which we shall have further occasion to advert, 
are, Satya, goodness or purity, knowledge, quiescence; Rajas, foulness, 
passion, activity; and Tamas, darkness, ignorance, inertia. 

06. Pradhanabuddhyadisu. This predicate of the Deity distinguishes most of 
the Purarias from several of the philosophical systems, which maintain, 
as did the earliest Grecian systems of cosmogony, the eternal and 
independent existence of the first principle of things, as nature, matter, or 
chaos. Accordingly, the commentator notices the objection. Pradhana 
being without beginning, it is said how can Vishnu be its parent? To 
which he replies, that this is not so, for in a period of worldly destruction 
(Pralaya), when the Creator desists from creating, nothing is generated by 
virtue of any other energy or parent. Or, if this be not satisfactory, then 
the text may be understood to imply that intellect (Buddhi) &c. are 


formed through the materiality of crude nature, or Pradhana. 

07. Vishnu is commonly derived in the Purarias from the root Vis, to enter, 
entering into, or pervading the universe, agreeably to the text of the 
Vedas, 'Having created that (world), he then afterwards enters into it;' 
being, as our comment observes, undistinguished by place, time, or 
property. According to the Matsya P. the name alludes to his entering into 
the mundane egg: according to the Padma P., to his entering into or 
combining with Prakriti, as Purusha or spirit. In the Moksha Dharma of 
the Mahabharata, s. 165, the word is derived from the root vi, signifying 
motion, pervasion, production, radiance; or, irregularly, from krama, to 
go with the particle vi, implying, variously, prefixed. 

08. Brahma and the rest is said to apply to the series of teachers through 
whom this Purana was transmitted from its first reputed author, Brahma, 
to its actual narrator, the sage Parasara. See also b. VI. c. 8. 

09. The Guru, or spiritual preceptor, is said to be Kapila or Saraswata; the 
latter is included in the series of teachers of the Purana. Parasara must be 
considered also as a disciple of Kapila, as a teacher of the Sankhya 
philosophy. 

10. Maitreya is the disciple of Parasara, who relates the Vishnu Purana to 
him; he is also one of the chief interlocutors in the Bhagavata, and is 
introduced in the Mahabharata (Vana Parva, s. 10.) as a great Rishi, or 
sage, who denounces Duryodhana's death. In the Bhagavata he is also 
termed Kausharavi, or the son of Kusharava. 

11. One copy reads Yuga dherma, the duties peculiar to the four ages, or their 
characteristic properties, instead of Yuganta. 

12. Sacrifice of Parasara. The story of Parasara's birth is narrated in detail in 
the Mahabharata (Adi Parva, s. 176). King Kalmashapada meeting with 

r 

Sakti, the son of Vasishtha, in a narrow path in a thicket, desired him to 
stand out of his way. The sage refused: on which the Raja beat him with 
his whip, and Sakti cursed him to become a Rakshas, a man-devouring 
spirit. The Raja in this transformation killed and ate its author, or Sakti, 

r 

together with all the other sons of Vasishtha. Sakti left his wife Adrisyanti 
pregnant, and she gave birth to Parasara, who was brought up by his 
grandfather. When he grew up, and was informed of his father's death, he 
instituted a sacrifice for the destruction of all the Rakshasas; but was 
dissuaded from its completion by Vasishtha and other sages or Atri, 
Pulastya, Pulaha, and Kratu. The Mahabharata adds, that when he 


desisted from the rite, he scattered the remaining sacrificial fire upon the 
northern face of the Himalaya mountain, where it still blazes forth at the 
phases of the moon, consuming Rakshasas, forests, and mountains. The 
legend alludes possibly to some transhimalayan volcano. The 
transformation of Kalmashapada is ascribed in other places to a different 
cause; but he is every where regarded as the devourer of Sakti or Saktri, 
as the name also occurs. The story is told in the Linga Purana 
(Purvarddha, s. 64) in the same manner, with the addition, conformably 
to the Saiva tendency of that work, that Parasara begins his sacrifice by 

r 

propitiating Mahadeva. Vasishtha's dissuasion, and Pulastya's 
appearance, are given in the very words of our text; and the story 

r 

concludes, 'thus through the favour of Pulastya and of the wise Vasishtha, 
Parasara composed the Vaishriava (Vishnu) Purana, containing ten 
thousand stanzas, and being the third of the Purana compilations' 
(Purariasanhita). The Bhagavata (b. III. s. 8) also alludes, though 
obscurely, to this legend. In recapitulating the succession of the narrators 
of part of the Bhagavata, Maitreya states that this first Purana was 
communicated to him by his Guru Parasara, as he had been desired by 
Pulastya: i. e. according to the commentator, agreeably to the boon given 
by Pulastya to Parasara, saying, You shall be a narrator of Puranas;. The 
Mahabharata makes no mention of the communication of this faculty to 
Parasara by Pulastya; and as the Bhagavata could not derive this 
particular from that source, it here most probably refers unavowedly, as 
the Linga does avowedly, to the Vishnu Purana. 

13. Pulastya, as will be presently seen, is one of the Rishis, who were the 
mind-born sons of Brahma. Pulaha, who is here also named, is another. 
Pulastya is considered as the ancestor of the Rakshasas, as he is the father 
of Visravas, the father of Ravana and his brethren. Uttara Ramayaria. 
Mahabharata, Vana Parva, s. 272. Padma Pur. Linga Pur. s. 63. 

14. Purana sanhita kertta Bhavan bha vishyati. You shall be a maker of the 
Sanhita, or compendium of the Puranas, or of the Vishnu Purana, 
considered as a summary or compendium of Pauranic traditions. In either 
sense it is incompatible with the general attribution of all the Puranas to 
Vyasa. 

15. Whether performing the usual ceremonies of the Brahmans, or leading a 
life of devotion and penance, which supersedes the necessity of rites and 
sacrifices. 


16. These are, in fact, the brief replies to Maitreya's six questions, or, How 
was the world created? By Vishnu. How will it be? At the periods of 
dissolution it will be in Vishnu. Whence proceeded animate and 
inanimate things? From Vishnu. Of what is the substance of the world? 
Vishnu. Into what has it been, and will it again he, resolved? Vishnu. He 
is therefore both the instrumental and material cause of the universe. 'The 
answer to the "whence" replies to the query as to the instrumental cause: 
"He is the world" replies to the inquiry as to the material cause.' 'And by 
this explanation of the agency of the materiality, &c. of Vishnu, as 
regards the universe, (it follows that) all will be produced from, and all 
will repose in him.' We have here precisely the to nav of the Orphic 
doctrines, and we might fancy that Bmcker was translating a passage 
from a Puraria when he describes them in these words: "Continuisse 
Jovem (lege Vishnum) sive summum ortum in se omnia, omnibus ortum 
ex se dedisse, omnia ex se genuisse, et ex sua produxisse essentia. 
Spiritum esse universi qui omnia regit vivificat estque; ex quibus 
necessario sequitur omnia in eum reditura." Hist. Philos. I. 388. 
Jamblichus and Proclus also testify that the Pythagorean doctrines of the 
origin of the material world from the Deity, and its identity with him, 
were much the same. Cudworth, 1. c. 




02. Chapter 


Prayer of Parasara to Vishnu. Successive narration of the Vishnu Puraria. 
Explanation of Vasudeva: his existence before creation: his first manifestations. 
Description of Pradhana or the chief principle of things. Cosmogony. Of 
Prakrita, or material creation; of time; of the active cause. Developement of 
effects; Mahat; Ahankara; Tanmatras; elements; objects of sense; senses; of the 
mundane egg. Vishnu the same as Brahma the creator; Vishnu the preserver; 
Rudra the destroyer. 

PARASARA said, Glory to the unchangeable, holy, eternal, supreme Vishnu, of 
one universal nature, the mighty over all: to him who is Hiranygarbha, Hari, and 
Sankara, the creator, the preserver, and destroyer of the world: to Vasudeva, the 
liberator of his worshippers: to him, whose essence is both single and manifold; 
who is both subtile and corporeal, indiscrete and discrete: to Vishnu, the cause of 
final emancipation, Glory to the supreme Vishnu, the cause of the creation, 
existence, and end of this world; who is the root of the world, and who consists 
of the world. 

Having glorified him who is the support of all things; who is the smallest of the 
small who is in all created things; the unchanged, imperishable Purushottama 
who is one with true wisdom, as truly known eternal and incorrupt; and who is 
known through false appearances by the nature of visible objects having bowed 
to Vishnu, the destroyer, and lord of creation and preservation; the ruler of the 
world; unborn, imperishable, undecaying: I will relate to you that which was 
originally imparted by the great father of all (Brahma), in answer to the 
questions of Daksha and other venerable sages, and repeated by them to 
Purukutsa, a king who reigned on the banks of the Narmada. It was next related 
by him to Saraswata, and by Saraswata to me. 

Who can describe him who is not to be apprehended by the senses: who is the 
best of all things; the supreme soul, self-existent: who is devoid of all the 
distinguishing characteristics of complexion, caste, or the like; and is exempt 
front birth, vicissitude, death, or decay: who is always, and alone: who exists 
every where, and in whom all things here exist; and who is thence named 


Vasudeva? He is Brahma, supreme, lord, eternal, unborn, imperishable, 
undecaying; of one essence; ever pure as free from defects. He, that Brahma, 
was all things; comprehending in his own nature the indiscrete and discrete. He 
then existed in the forms of Purusha and of Kala. Purusha (spirit) is the first 
form, of the supreme; next proceeded two other forms, the discrete and 
indiscrete; and Kala (time) was the last. These four—Pradhana (primary or crude 
matter), Purusha (spirit), Vyakta (visible substance), and Kala (time)—the wise 
consider to be the pure and supreme condition of Vishnu. These four forms, in 
their due proportions, are the causes of the production of the phenomena of 
creation, preservation, and destruction. Vishnu being thus discrete and indiscrete 
substance, spirit, and time, sports like a playful boy, as you shall learn by 
listening to his frolics. 

That chief principle (Pradhana), which is the indiscrete cause, is called by the 
sages also Prakriti (nature): it is subtile, uniform, and comprehends what is and 
what is not (or both causes and effects); is durable, self-sustained, illimitable, 
undecaying, and stable; devoid of sound or touch, and possessing neither colour 
nor form; endowed with the three qualities (in equilibrium); the mother of the 
world; without beginning; and that into which all that is produced is resolved. By 
that principle all things were invested in the period subsequent to the last 
dissolution of the universe, and prior to creation. For Brahmans learned in the 
Vedas, and teaching truly their doctrines, explain such passages as the following 
as intending the production of the chief principle (Pradhana). "There was neither 
day nor night, nor sky nor earth, nor darkness nor light, nor any other thing, save 
only One, unapprehensible by intellect, or That which is Brahma and Puman 
(spirit) and Pradhana (matter)." The two forms which are other than the essence 
of unmodified Vishnu, are Pradhana (matter) and Purusha (spirit); and his other 
form, by which those two are connected or separated, is called Kala (time). 
When discrete substance is aggregated in crude nature, as in a foregone 
dissolution, that dissolution is termed elemental (Prakrita). The deity as Time is 
without beginning, and his end is not known; and from him the revolutions of 
creation, continuance, and dissolution unintermittingly succeed: for when, in the 
latter season, the equilibrium of the qualities (Pradhana) exists, and spirit 
(Puman) is detached from matter, then the form of Vishnu which is Time abides. 
Then the supreme Brahma, the supreme soul, the substance of the world, the lord 
of all creatures, the universal soul, the supreme ruler, Hari, of his own will 
having entered into matter and spirit, agitated the mutable and immutable 



principles, the season of creation being arrived, in the same manner as fragrance 
affects the mind from its proximity merely, and not from any immediate 
operation upon mind itself: so the Supreme influenced the elements of creation. 
Purushottama is both the agitator and the thing to be agitated; being present in 
the essence of matter, both when it is contracted and expanded. Vishnu, supreme 
over the supreme, is of the nature of discrete forms in the atomic productions, 
Brahma and the rest (gods, men, &c.) 

Then from that equilibrium of the qualities (Pradhana), presided over by soul, 
proceeds the unequal developement of those qualities (constituting the principle 
Mahat or Intellect) at the time of creation. The Chief principle then invests that 
Great principle, Intellect, and it becomes threefold, as affected by the quality of 
goodness, foulness, or darkness, and invested by the Chief principle (matter) as 
seed is by its skin. From the Great principle (Mahat) Intellect, threefold Egotism, 
(Ahankara), denominated Vaikarika, 'pure;' Taijasa, 'passionate;' and Bhutadi, 
'rudimental,' is produced; the origin of the (subtile) elements, and of the organs 
of sense; invested, in consequence of its three qualities, by Intellect, as Intellect 
is by the Chief principle. Elementary Egotism then becoming productive, as the 
mdiment of sound, produced from it Ether, of which sound is the characteristic, 
investing it with its rudiment of sound. Ether becoming productive, engendered 
the rudiment of touch; whence originated strong wind, the property of which is 
touch; and Ether, with the rudiment of sound, enveloped the rudiment of touch. 
Then wind becoming productive, produced the rudiment of form (colour); 
whence light (or fire) proceeded, of which, form (colour) is the attribute; and the 
mdiment of touch enveloped the wind with the rudiment of colour. Light 
becoming productive, produced the rudiment of taste; whence proceed all juices 
in which flavour resides; and the rudiment of colour invested the juices with the 
mdiment of taste. The waters becoming productive, engendered the rudiment of 
smell; whence an aggregate (earth) originates, of which smell is the property. In 
each several element resides its peculiar rudiment; thence the property of 
tanmatrata, (type or rudiment) is ascribed to these elements. Rudimental 
elements are not endowed with qualities, and therefore they are neither soothing, 
nor terrific, nor stupifying. This is the elemental creation, proceeding from the 
principle of egotism affected by the property of darkness. The organs of sense 
are said to be the passionate products of the same principle, affected by foulness; 
and the ten divinities proceed from egotism affected by the principle of 
goodness; as does Mind, which is the eleventh. The organs of sense are ten: of 



the ten, five are the skin, eye, nose, tongue, and ear; the object of which, 
combined with Intellect, is the apprehension of sound and the rest: the organs of 
excretion and procreation, the hands, the feet, and the voice, form the other five; 
of which excretion, generation, manipulation, motion, and speaking, are the 
several acts. 

Then, ether, air, light, water, and earth, severally united with the properties of 
sound and the rest, existed as distinguishable according to their qualities, as 
soothing, terrific, or stupifying; but possessing various energies, and being 
unconnected, they could not, without combination, create living beings, not 
having blended with each other. Having combined, therefore, with one another, 
they assumed, through their mutual association, the character of one mass of 
entire unity; and from the direction of spirit, with the acquiescence of the 
indiscrete Principle, Intellect and the rest, to the gross elements inclusive, 
formed an egg, which gradually expanded like a bubble of water. This vast egg, 
O sage, compounded of the elements, and resting on the waters, was the 
excellent natural abode of Vishnu in the form of Brahma; and there Vishnu, the 
lord of the universe, whose essence is inscrutable, assumed a perceptible form, 
and even he himself abided in it in the character of Brahma. Its womb, vast as 
the mountain Meru, was composed of the mountains; and the mighty oceans 
were the waters that filled its cavity. In that egg, O Brahman, were the continents 
and seas and mountains, the planets and divisions of the universe, the gods, the 
demons, and mankind. And this egg was externally invested by seven natural 
envelopes, or by water, air, fire, ether, and Ahankara the origin of the elements, 
each tenfold the extent of that which it invested; next came the principle of 
Intelligence; and, finally, the whole was surrounded by the indiscrete Principle: 
resembling thus the cocoa-nut, filled interiorly with pulp, and exteriorly covered 
by husk and rind. 

Affecting then the quality of activity, Hari, the lord of all, himself becoming 
Brahma, engaged in the creation of the universe. Vishnu with the quality of 
goodness, and of immeasurable power, preserves created things through 
successive ages, until the close of the period termed a Kalpa; when the same 
mighty deity, Janarddana, invested with the quality of darkness, assumes the 
awful form of Rudra, and swallows up the universe. Having thus devoured all 
things, and converted the world into one vast ocean, the Supreme reposes upon 
his mighty serpent couch amidst the deep: he awakes after a season, and again, 



as Brahma, becomes the author of creation. 

Thus the one only god, Janarddana, takes the designation of Brahma, Vishnu, 
and Siva, accordingly as he creates, preserves, or destroys. Vishnu as creator, 
creates himself; as preserver, preserves himself; as destroyer, destroys himself at 
the end of all things. This world of earth, air, fire, water, ether, the senses, and 
the mind; all that is termed spirit, that also is the lord of all elements, the 
universal form, and imperishable: hence he is the cause of creation, preservation, 
and destruction; and the subject of the vicissitudes inherent in elementary nature. 
He is the object and author of creation: he preserves, destroys, and is preserved. 
He, Vishnu, as Brahma, and as all other beings, is infinite form: he is the 
supreme, the giver of all good, the fountain of all happiness. 


Footnotes 

01. The three hypostases of Vishnu. Hiranyagarbha is a name of Brahma; he 
who was born from the golden egg. Hari is Vishnu, and Sankara Siva. The 
Vishnu who is the subject of our text is the supreme being in all these three 
divinities or hypostases, in his different characters of creator, preserver and 
destroyer. Thus in the Markandeya: 'Accordingly, as the primal all-pervading 
spirit is distinguished by attributes in creation and the rest, so he obtains the 
denomination of Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva. In the capacity of Brahma he 
creates the worlds; in that of Rudra he destroys them; in that of Vishnu he is 
quiescent. These are the three Avasthas (ht. hypostases) of the self-born. 
Brahma is the quality of activity; Rudra that of darkness; Vishnu, the lord of 
the world, is goodness: so, therefore, the three gods are the three qualities. 
They are ever combined with, and dependent upon one another; and they are 
never for an instant separate; they never quit each other.' The notion is one 
common to all antiquity, although less philosophically conceived, or perhaps 
less distinctly expressed, in the passages which have come down to us. The 
ipdc; bpxucbc; unooraoeic; of Plato are said by Cudworth (I. Ill), upon the 
authority of Plotinus, to be an ancient doctrine, naAaid 5o^a: and he also 
observes, "Orpheus, Pythagoras, and Plato have all of them asserted a trinity 
of divine hypostases; and as they unquestionably derived much of their 


doctrine from the Egyptians, it may reasonably be suspected that the 
Egyptians did the like before them." As however the Grecian accounts, and 
those of the Egyptians, are much more perplexed and unsatisfactory than those 
of the Hindus, it is most probable that we find amongst them the doctrine in its 
most original as well as most methodical and significant form. 

02. This address to Vishnu pursues the notion that he, as the supreme being, is 
one, whilst he is all: he is Avikara, not subject to change; Sadaikarupa, one 
invariable nature: he is the liberator (tara), or he who bears mortals across the 
ocean of existence: he is both single and manifold (ekanekarupa): and he is 
the indiscrete (avyakta) cause of the world, as well as the discrete (vyakta) 
effect; or the invisible cause, and visible creation. 

03. Jaganmaya, made up, or consisting substantially of the world. Maya is an 
affix denoting 'made' or 'consisting of,' as Kashtha maya, 'made of wood.' The 
world is therefore not regarded by the Pauranics as an emanation or an 
illusion, but as consubstantial with its first cause. 

04. Amyansam amyasam, 'the most atomic of the atomic;' alluding to the 
atomic theory of the Nyaya or logical school. 

05. Or Achyuta; a common name of Vishnu, from a, privative, and chyuta, 
fallen; according to our comment, 'he who does not perish with created 
things.' The Mahabharata interprets it in one place to mean, 'he who is not 
distinct from final emancipation;' and in another to signify, 'exempt from 
decay'. A commentator on the Kasikharida of the Skanda Puraria explains it, 
'he who never declines (or varies) from his own proper nature.' 

06. This is another common title of Vishnu, implying supreme, best (Uttama), 
spirit (Purusha), or male, or sacrifice, or, according to the Mahabh. Moksha 
Dharma, whatever sense Purusha may bear. 

07. Paramarthatas, 'by or through the real object, or sense; through actual 
truth.' 

08. Bhranti dersanatas, 'false appearances,' in opposition to actual truth. 'By 
the nature of visible objects': Artha is explained by drisya, 'visible;' swarupena 


'by the nature of:' that is, visible objects are not what they seem to be, 
independent existences; they are essentially one with their original source: and 
knowledge of their true nature or relation to Vishnu, is knowledge of Vishnu 
himself. This is not the doctrine of Maya, or the influence of illusion, which 
alone, according to Vedanta idealism, constitutes belief in the existence of 
matter: a doctrine foreign to most of the Puranas, and first introduced amongst 
them apparently by the Bhagavata. 

09. A different and more detailed account of the transmission of the Vishnu 
Puraria is given in the last book, c. 8. 

10. The ordinary derivation of Vasudeva has been noticed above (p. 1): here it 
is derived from Vas, 'to dwell,' from Vishnu's abiding in all things, and all in 
him. The Mahabharata explains Vasu in the same manner, and Deva to signify 
radiant, shining: 'He causes all things to dwell in him, and he abides in all; 
whence he is named Vasu: being resplendent as the sun, he is called Deva: and 
he who is both these, is denominated Vasudeva.' See also b. VI. c. 5. 

11. The commentator argues that Vasudeva must be the Brahma, or supreme 
being, of the Vedas, because the same circumstances are predicated of both, as 
eternity, omnipresence, omnipotence, &c.; but he does not adduce any 
scriptural text with the name Vasudeva. 

12. Time is not usually enumerated in the Puranas as an element of the first 
cause, but the Padma P. and the Bhagavata agree with the Vishnu in including 
it. It appears to have been regarded at an earlier date as an independent cause: 
the commentator on the Moksha Dherma cites a passage from the Vedas, 
which he understands to allude to the different theories of the cause of 
creation. Time, inherent nature, consequence of acts, self-will, elementary 
atoms, matter, and spirit, asserted severally by the Astrologers, the Buddhists, 
the Mimansakas, the Jains, the Logicians, the Sankhyas, and the Vedantis. 
Kpovoc; was also one of the first generated agents in creation, according to the 
Orphic theogony. 

13. The creation of the world is very commonly considered to be the Lila, 
sport or amusement, of the Supreme Being. 


14. The attributes of Pradhana, the chief (principle or element), here specified, 
conform generally to those ascribed to it by the Sankhya philosophy (Sankhya 
Karika, p. 16, &c.), although some of them are incompatible with its origin 
from a first cause. In the Sankhya this incongruity does not occur; for there 
Pradhana is independent, and coordinate with primary spirit. The Puranas give 
rise to the inconsistency by a lax use of both philosophical and pantheistical 
expressions. The most incongruous epithets in our text are however explained 
away in the comment. Thus nitya, 'eternal,' is said to mean 'uniform, not liable 
to increase or diminution:' Sadasadatmaka, 'comprehending what is and what 
is not,' means 'having the power of both cause and effect', as proceeding from 
Vishnu, and as giving origin to material things. Anadi, 'without beginning,' 
means 'without birth', not being engendered by any created thing, but 
proceeding immediately from the first cause. 'The mother,' or literally the 
womb of the world', means the passive agent in creation,' operated on or 
influenced by the active will of the Creator. The first part of the passage in the 
text is a favourite one with several of. the Puranas, but they modify it and 
apply it after their own fashion. In the Vishnu the original is ###, rendered as 
above. The Vayu, Brahmanda, and Kurmma Puranas have 'The indiscrete 
cause, which is uniform, and both cause and effect, and whom those who are 
acquainted with first principles call Pradhana and Prakriti—is the uncognizable 
Brahma, who was before all.' But the application of two synonymes of Prakriti 
to Brahma seems unnecessary at least. The Brahma P. corrects the reading 
apparently: the first line is as before; the second is, ###. The passage is placed 
absolutely; 'There was an indiscrete cause eternal, and cause and effect, which 
was both matter and spirit (Pradhana and Purusha), from which this world was 
made. Instead of 'such' or this,' some copies read 'from which Iswara or god 
(the active deity or Brahma) made the world.' The Hari Vansa has the same 
reading, except in the last term, which it makes ### that is, according to the 
commentator, the world, which is Iswara, was made.' The same authority 
explains this indiscrete cause, avyakta karana, to denote Brahma, the creator 
an identification very unusual, if not inaccurate, and possibly founded on 
misapprehension of what is stated by the Bhavishya P.: 'That male or spirit 
which is endowed with that which is the indiscrete cause, &c. is known in the 
world as Brahma: he being in the egg, &c.' The passage is precisely the same 

r 

in Manu, I, 11; except that we have 'visrishta' instead of 'visishtha:' the latter is 
a questionable reading, and is probably wrong: the sense of the latter is, 
detached; and the whole means very consistently, 'embodied spirit detached 





from the indiscrete cause of the world is known as Brahma.' The Padma P. 
inserts the first line, ### &c., but has 'Which creates undoubtedly Mahat and 
the other qualities' assigning the first epithets, therefore, as the Vishnu does, to 
Prakriti only. The Linga also refers the expression to Prakriti alone, but makes 
it a secondary cause: 'An indiscrete cause, which those acquainted with first 
principles call Pradhana and Prakriti, proceeded from that Iswara (Siva).' This 
passage is one of very many instances in which expressions are common to 
several Puranas that seem to be borrowed from one another, or from some 
common source older than any of them, especially in this instance, as the 
same text occurs in Manu. 

15. The expression of the text is rather obscure; 'All was pervaded (or 
comprehended) by that chief principle before (recreation), after the (last) 
destruction.' The ellipses are filled up by the commentator. This, he adds, is to 
be regarded as the state of things at a Maha Pralaya, or total dissolution; 
leaving, therefore, crude matter, nature, or chaos, as a coexistent element with 
the Supreme. This, which is conformable to the philosophical doctrine, is not 
however that of the Puranas in general, nor that of our text, which states (b. 
VI. c. 4), that at a Prakrita, or elementary dissolution, Pradhana itself merges 
into the deity. Neither is it apparently the doctrine of the Vedas, although their 
language is somewhat equivocal. 

16. The metre here is one common to the Vedas, Trishtubh, but in other 
respects the language is not characteristic of those compositions. The purport 
of the passage is rendered somewhat doubtful by its close, and by the 
explanation of the commentator. The former is, 'One Pradhanika Brahma 
Spirit: THAT, was. The commentator explains Pradhanika, Pradhana eva, the 
same word as Pradhana; but it is a derivative word, which may be used 
attributively, implying 'having, or conjoined with, Pradhana.' The 
commentator, however, interprets it as the substantive; for he adds, 'There was 
Pradhana and Brahma and Spirit; this triad was at the period of dissolution.' 
He evidently, however, understands their conjoint existence as one only; for 
he continues, 'So, according to the Vedas, then there was neither the existent 
(invisible cause, or matter) nor the non-existent (visible effect, or creation),' 
meaning that there was only One Being, in whom matter and its modifications 
were all comprehended. 



17. Or it might be rendered, 'Those two other forms (which proceed) from his 
supreme nature;' that is, from the nature of Vishnu, when he is Nirupadhi, or 
without adventitious attributes: ### 'other' (###); the commentator states they 
are other or separate from Vishnu only through Maya, illusion,' but here 
implying false notion;' the elements of creation being in essence one with 
Vishnu, though in existence detached and different. 

18. Pradhana, when unmodified, is, according to the Sankhyas and Pauranics, 
nothing more than the three qualities in equilibrio, or goodness, foulness, and 
darkness neutralising each other; (Sankhya Karika, p. 52;) so in the Matsya P.: 
###. This state is synonymous with the non-evolution of material products, or 
with dissolution; implying, however, separate existence, and detached from 
spirit This being the case, it is asked who. should sustain matter and spirit 
whilst separate, or renew their combination so as to renovate creation? It is 
answered, Time, which is when every thing else is not; and which, at the end 
of a certain interval, unites Matter, Pradhana, and Purusha, and produces 
creation. Conceptions of this kind are evidently comprised in the Orphic triad, 
or the ancient notion of the cooperation of three such principles in creation; as 
Phanes or Eros, which is the Hindu spirit or Purusha; Chaos, matter or 
Pradhana; and Chronos, or Kala, time. 

19. Pradhana is styled Vyaya 'that which may be expended;' or Parihamin, 
'which may be modified:' and Purusha is called Avyaya, 'inconsumable; or 
aparina.min, 'immutable.' The expressions 'having entered into,' and 'agitated,' 
recall the mode in which divine intelligence, mens, vout;, was conceived by 
the ancients to operate upon matter: 

or as in a more familiar passage; 

Spiritus intus alit totamque infusa per artus 
Mens agitat molem et magno se corpore miscet: 

or perhaps it more closely approximates to the Phoenician cosmogony, in 
which a spirit mixing with its own principles gives rise to creation. Brucker, I. 
240. As presently explained, the mixture is not mechanical; it is an influence 
or effect exerted upon intermediate agents, which produce effects; as perfumes 
do not delight the mind by actual contact, but by the impression they make 




upon the sense of smelling, which communicates it to the mind. The entrance 
of the supreme Vishnu into spirit as well as matter is less intelligible than the 
view elsewhere taken of it, as the infusion of spirit, identified with the 
Supreme, into Prakriti or matter alone. Thus in the Padma Purana: 'He who is 
called the male (spirit) of Prakriti, is here named Achyuta; and that same 
divine Vishnu entered into Prakriti.' So the Vrihat Naradiya: 'The lord of the 
world, who is called Purusha, producing agitation in Prakriti.' From the notion 
of influence or agitation produced on matter through or with spirit, the abuse 
of personification led to actual or vicarious admixture. Thus the Bhagavata, 
identifying Maya with Prakriti, has, 'Through the operation of time, the 
Mighty One, who is present to the pure, implanted a seed in Maya endowed 
with qualities, as Purusha, which is one with himself.' B. III. s.5. And the 
Bhavishya: 'Some learned men say, that the Supreme Being, desirous to create 
beings, creates in the commencement of the Kalpa a body of soul (or an 
incorporeal substance); which soul created by him enters into Prakriti; and 
Prakriti being thereby agitated, creates many material elements.' But these 
may be regarded as notions of a later date. In the Mahabharata the first cause 
is declared to be 'Intellectual,' who creates by his mind or will: The first 
(Being) is called Manasa (intellectual), and is so celebrated by great sages: he 
is God, without beginning or end, indivisible, immortal, undecaying.' And 
again: 'The Intellectual created many kinds of creatures by his mind.' 

20. Contraction, Sankocha, is explained by Samya, sameness or equilibrium of 
the three qualities, or inert Pradhana: and Expansion, Vikasa, is the destruction 
of this equipoise, by previous agitation and consequent developement of 
material products. 

21. The term here is Kshetrajna, 'embodied spirit,' or that which knows the 
kshetra or 'body;' implying the combination of spirit with form or matter, for 
the purpose of creating. 

22. The first product of Pradhana sensible to divine, though not to mere 
human organs, is, both according to the Sankhya and Pauranic doctrines, the 
principle called Mahat, literally 'the Great,' explained in other places, as in our 
text, 'the production of the manifestation of the qualities:' or, as in the Vayu, 
###. We have in the same Purana, as well as in the Brahmanda and Linga, a 
number of synonymes for this term, as, ###. They are also explained, though 



not very distinctly, to the following purport: "Manas is that which considers 
the consequences of acts to all creatures, and provides for their happiness. 
Mahat, the Great principle, is so termed from being the first of the created 
principles, and from its extension being greater than that of the rest. Mati is 
that which discriminates and distinguishes objects preparatory to their fruition 
by Soul. Brahma implies that which effects the developement and 
augmentation of created things. Pur is that by which the concurrence of nature 
occupies and fills all bodies. Buddhi is that which communicates to soul the 
knowledge of good and evil. Khyati is the means of individual fruition, or the 
faculty of discriminating objects by appropriate designations, and the like. 
Iswara is that which knows all things as if they were present. Prajna is that by 
which the properties of things are known. Chiti is that by which the 
consequences of acts and species of knowledge are selected for the use of 
soul. Smriti is the faculty of recognising all things, past, present, or to come. 
Samvit is that in which all things are found or known, and which is found or 
known in all things: and Vipura is that which is free from the effects of 
contrarieties, as of knowledge and ignorance, and the like. Mahat is also 
called Iswara, from its exercising supremacy over all things; Bhava, from its 
elementary existence; Eka, or 'the one,' from its singleness; Purusha, from its 
abiding within the body; and from its being ungenerated it is called 
Swayambhu." Now in this nomenclature we have chiefly two sets of words; 
one, as Manas, Buddhi, Mati, signifying mind, intelligence, knowledge, 
wisdom, design; and the other, as Brahma, Iswara, &c., denoting an active 
creator and ruler of the universe: as the Vayu adds, 'Mahat, impelled by the 
desire to create, causes various creation:' and the Mahabharata has, 'Mahat 
created Ahankara.' The Puranas generally employ the same expression, 
attributing to Mahat or Intelligence the 'act of creating. Mahat is therefore the 
divine mind in creative operation, the vou<; 6 SiaKoopcov xe xai navicov ainoc; 
of Anaxagoras; an ordering and disposing mind, which was the cause of all 
things: The word itself suggests some relationship to the Phoenician Mot, 
which, like Mahat, was the first product of the mixture of spirit and matter, 
and the first rudiment of creation: "Ex connexione autem ejus spiritus prodiit 
mot. . . hinc seminium omnis creaturae et omnium rerum creatio." Brucker, I. 
240. Mot, it is true, . appears to be a purely material substance, whilst Mahat 
is an incorporeal substance; but they agree in their place in the cosmogony, 
and are something alike in name. How far also the Phoenician system has been 
accurately described, is matter of uncertainty. See Sankhya Karika. 


23. The sense of Ahankara cannot be very well rendered by any European 
term. It means the principle of individual existence, that which appropriates 
perceptions, and on which depend the notions, I think, I feel, I am. It might be 
expressed by the proposition of Descartes reversed; "Sum, ergo cogito, 
sentio," &c. The equivalent employed by Mr. Colebrooke, egotism, has the 
advantage of an analogous etymology, Ahankara being derived from Aham, 
'I;' as in the Hari Vansa: 'He (Brahma), oh Bharata, said, I will create 
creatures.' See also S. Karika. 

24. These three varieties of Ahankara are also described in the Sankhya 
Karika, Vaikarika, that which is productive, or susceptible of production, is 
the same as the Satwika, or that which is combined with the property of 
goodness. Taijasa Ahankara is that which is endowed with Tejas, heat' or 
energy,' in consequence of its having the property of Rajas, 'passion' or 
'activity;' and the third kind, Bhutadi, or 'elementary,' is the Tamasa, or has the 
property of darkness. From the first kind proceed the senses; from the last, the 
rudimental unconscious elements; both kinds, which are equally of themselves 
inert, being rendered productive by the cooperation of the second, the 
energetic or active modification of Ahankara, which is therefore said to be the 
origin of both the senses and the elements. 

25. The successive series of rudiments and elements, and their respectively 
engendering the rudiments and elements next in order, occur in most of the 
Puranas, in nearly the same words. The Vrihannaradiya P. observes, 'They (the 
elements) in successive order acquire the property of causality one to the 
other.' The order is also the same; or, ether (akas), wind or air (vayu), fire or 
light (tejas), water and earth; except in one passage of the Mahabharata 
(Moksha Dherma, C. 9), where it is ether, water, fire, air, earth. The order of 
Empedocles was ether, fire, earth, water, air. Cudworth, I. 97. The investment 
(avarana) of each element by its own rudiment, and of each rudiment by its 
preceding gross and rudimental elements, is also met with in most of the chief 
Puranas, as the Vayu, Padma, Linga, and Bhagavata; and traces p. 17 of it are 
found amongst the ancient cosmogonists; for Anaximander supposed, that 
when the world was made, a certain sphere or flame of fire, separated from 
matter (the Infinite), encompassed the air, which invested the earth as the bark 
does a tree: Euseb. Pr, I. 15. Some of the Puranas, as the Matsya, Vayu, Linga, 


Bhagavata, and Markarideya, add a description of a participation of properties 
amongst the elements, which is rather Vedanta than Sankhya. According to 
this notion, the elements add to their characteristic properties those of the 
elements which precede them. Akas has the single property of sound: air has 
those of touch and sound: fire has colour, touch, and sound: water has taste, 
colour, touch, and sound: and earth has smell and the rest, thus having five 
properties: or, as the Linga P. describes the series, ###. 

26. Tanmatra, 'rudiment' or 'type,' from Tad, 'that,' for Tasmin, 'in that' gross 
element, and matra, 'subtile or rudimental form'. The rudiments are also the 
characteristic properties of the elements: as the Bhagavata; 'The rudiment of it 
(ether) is also its quality, sound; as a common designation may denote both a 
person who sees an object, and the object which is to be seen: that is, 
according to the commentator, suppose a person behind a wall called aloud, 
"An elephant! an elephant!" the term would equally indicate that an elephant 
was visible, and that somebody saw it. Bhag. II. 5. 

27. The properties here alluded to are not those of goodness &c., but other 
properties assigned to perceptible objects by the Sankhya doctrines, or Santi, 
'placidity;' Ghorata, 'terror;' and Moha, 'dulness' or 'stupefaction.' S. Karika, 
V.38. 

28. The Bhagavata, which gives a similar statement of the origin of the 
elements, senses, and divinities, specifies the last to be Dis (space), air, the 
sun, Prachetas, the Aswins, fire, Indra, Upendra, Mitra, and Ka or Prajapati, 
presiding over the senses, according to the comment, or severally over the ear, 
skin, eye, tongue, nose, speech, hands, feet, and excretory and generative 
organs. Bhag. II. 5. 31. 

29. Avyaktanugrahena. The expression is something equivocal, as Avyakta 
may here apply either to the First Cause or to matter. In either case the notion 
is the same, and the aggregation of the elements is the effect of the presidence 
of spirit, without any active interference of the indiscrete principle. The 
Avyakta is passive in the evolution and combination of Mahat and the rest. 
Pradhana is, no doubt, intended, but its identification with the Supreme is also 
implied. The term Anugraha may also refer to a classification of the order of 
creation, which will be again adverted to. 



30. It is impossible not to refer this notion to the same origin as the widely 
diffused opinion of antiquity, of the first manifestation of the world in the 
form of an egg. "It seems to have been a favourite symbol, and very ancient, 
and we find it adopted among many nations." Bryant, III. 165. Traces of it 
occur amongst the Syrians, Persians, and Egyptians; and besides the Orphic 
egg amongst the Greeks, and that described by Aristophanes, part of the 
ceremony in the Dionysiaca and other mysteries consisted of the consecration 
of an egg; by which, according to Porphyry, was signified the world: 
'Eppqveuci 5e to oov tov Koopov. Whether this egg typified the ark, as Bryant 
and Faber suppose, is not material to the proof of the antiquity and wide 
diffusion of the belief that the world in the beginning existed in such a figure. 
A similar account of the first aggregation of the elements in the form of an egg 
is given in all the Puranas, with the usual epithet Haima or Hiranya, 'golden,' 
as it occurs in Manu, I. 9. 

31. Here is another analogy to the doctrines of antiquity relating to the 
mundane egg: and as the first visible male being, who, as we shall hereafter 
see, united in himself the nature of either sex, abode in the egg, and issued 
from it; so "this firstborn of the world, whom they represented under two 
shapes and characters, and who sprung from the mundane egg, was the person 
from whom the mortals and immortals were derived. He was the same as 
Dionusus, whom they styled, npcoioyovov Supvfj xpiyovov BaK/etov Avaxia 
Aypiov appqiov Kpixpiov Sucepoia Sipotpov:" or, with the omission of one 
epithet,, ###. 

32. Janarddana is derived from Jana, 'men,' and Arddana, 'worship;' 'the object 
of adoration to mankind.' 

33. This is the invariable doctrine of the Puranas, diversified only according to 
the individual divinity to whom they ascribe identity with Paramatma or 
Parameswara. In our text this is Vishnu: in the Saiva Puranas, as in the Linga, 
it is Siva: in the Brahma-vaivartta it is Krishna. The identification of one of 
the hypostases with the common source of the triad was an incongruity not 
unknown to other theogonies; for Cneph, amongst the Egyptians, appears on 
the one hand to have been identified with the Supreme Being, the indivisible 
unity, whilst on the other he is confounded with both Emeph and Ptha, the 



second and third persons of the triad of hypostases. Cudworth, I. 4. 18. 

34. 'The world that is termed spirit;' explained by the commentator, 'which 
indeed bears the appellation spirit;' conformably to the text of the Vedas, 'this 
universe is indeed spirit.' This is rather Vedanta than Sankhya, and appears to 
deny the existence of matter: and so it does as an independent existence; for 
the origin and end of infinite substance is the Deity or universal spirit: but it 
does not therefore imply the non-existence of the world as real substance. 

35. Vishnu is both Bhutesa, 'lord of the elements,' or of created things, and 
Viswarupa, 'universal substance:' he is therefore, as one with sensible things, 
subject to his own control. 

36. Vareriya, 'most excellent;' being the same, according to the commentator, 
with supreme felicity. 




03. Chapter 


r 

Measure of time. Moments or Kashthas, &c.; day and night; fortnight, month, 
year, divine year: Yugas, or ages: Mahayuga, or great age: day of Brahma: 
periods of the Manus: a Manwantara: night of Brahma, and destruction of the 
world: a year of Brahma: his life: a Kalpa: a Pararrdha: the past, or Padma 
Kalpa: the present, or Varaha. 

MAITREYA.—How can creative agency be attributed to that Brahma, who is 
without qualities, illimitable, pure, and free from imperfection? 

PARASARA.— 1 The essential properties of existent things are objects of 
observation, of which no foreknowledge is attainable; and creation, and 
hundreds of properties, belong to Brahma, as inseparable parts of his essence, as 
heat, oh chief of sages, is inherent in fire. Hear then how the deity Narayana, in 
the person of Brahma, the great parent of the world, created all existent things. 

Brahma is said to be born: a familiar phrase, to signify his manifestation; and, as 
the peculiar measure of his presence, a hundred of his years is said to constitute 
his life: that period is also called Param, and the half of it, Pararddham. I have 
already declared to you, oh sinless Brahman, that Time is a form of Vishnu: hear 
now how it is applied to measure the duration of Brahma, and of all other 
sentient beings, as well as of those which are unconscious, as the mountains, 
oceans, and the like. 

/ r 

Oh best of sages, fifteen twinklings of the eye make a Kashtha; thirty Kashthas, 
one Kala; and thirty Kalas, one Muhurtta. Thirty Muhurttas constitute a day and 
night of mortals: thirty such days make a month, divided into two half-months: 
six months form an Ayana (the period of the sun's progress north or south of the 
ecliptic): and two Ayanas compose a year. The southern Ayana is a night, and the 
northern a day of the gods. Twelve thousand divine years, each composed of 
(three hundred and sixty) such days, constitute the period of the four Yugas, or 
ages. They are thus distributed: the Krita age has four thousand divine years; the 
Treta three thousand; the Dwapara two thousand; and the Kali age one thousand: 
so those acquainted with antiquity have declared. The period that precedes a 


Yuga is called a Sandhya, and it is of as many hundred years as there are 
thousands in the Yuga: and the period that follows a Yuga, termed the 
Sandhyansa, is of similar duration. The interval between the Sandhya and the 
Sandhyansa is the Yuga, denominated Krita, Treta, &c. The Krita, Treta, 
Dwapara, and Kali, constitute a great age, or aggregate of four ages: a thousand 
such aggregates are a day of Brahma, and fourteen Menus reign within that term. 
Hear the division of time which they measure. 

Seven Rishis, certain (secondary) divinities, Indra, Manu, and the kings his sons, 
are created and perish at one period and the interval, called a Manwantara, is 
equal to seventy-one times the number of years contained in the four Yugas, with 
some additional years: this is the duration of the Manu, the (attendant) divinities, 
and the rest, which is equal to 852.000 divine years, or to 306.720.000 years of 
mortals, independent of the additional period. Fourteen times this period 
constitutes a Brahma day, that is, a day of Brahma; the term (Brahma) being the 
derivative form. At the end of this day a dissolution of the universe occurs, when 
all the three worlds, earth, and the regions of space, are consumed with fire. The 
dwellers of Maharloka (the region inhabited by the saints who survive the 
world), distressed by the heat, repair then to Janaloka (the region of holy men 
after their decease). When the-three worlds are but one mighty ocean, Brahma, 
who is one with Narayana, satiate with the demolition of the universe, sleeps 
upon his serpent-bed—contemplated, the lotus born, by the ascetic inhabitants of 
the Janaloka—for a night of equal duration with his day; at the close of which he 
creates anew. Of such days and nights is a year of Brahma composed; and a 
hundred such years constitute his whole life. One Pararddha, or half his 
existence, has expired, terminating with the Maha Kalpa called Padma. The 
Kalpa (or day of Brahma) termed Varaha is the first of the second period of 
Brahma's existence. 




Footnotes 

01. Agency depends upon the Raja guna, the quality of foulness or passion, 
which is an imperfection. Perfect being is void of all qualities, and is therefore 
inert: 


Omnis enim per se divom natura necesse est 
Immortali aevo summa cum pace fruatur: 

but if inert for ever, creation could not occur. The objection is rather evaded 
than answered. The ascribing to Brahma of innumerable and unappreciable 
properties is supported by the commentator with vague and scarcely 
applicable texts of the Vedas. 'In him there is neither instrument nor effect: his 
like, his superior, is nowhere seen.' 'That supreme soul is the subjugator of all, 
the ruler of all, the sovereign of all.' In various places of the Vedas also it is 
said that his power is supreme, and that wisdom, power, and action are his 
essential properties. The origin of creation is also imputed in the Vedas to the 
rise of will or desire in the Supreme: 'He wished I may become manifold, I 
may create creatures.' The Bhagavata expresses the same doctrine: 'The 
Supreme Being was before all things alone, the soul and lord of spiritual 
substance: in consequence of his own will he is secondarily defined, as if of 
various minds.' This will however, in the mysticism of the Bhagavata, is 
personified as Maya: 'She (that desire) was the energy of the Supreme, who 
was contemplating (the untreated world); and by her, whose name is Maya, 
the Lord made the universe.' This, which was at first a mere poetical 
personification of the divine will, came, in such works as the Bhagavata, to 
denote a female divinity, coequal and coeternal with the First Cause. It may be 
doubted if the Vedas authorize such a mystification, and no very decided 
vestige of it occurs in the Vishnu Puraria. 

02. This term is also applied to a different and still more protracted period. 
See b. VI. C. 3. 

03. The last proportion is rather obscurely expressed: 'Thirty of them (Kalas) 
are the rule for the Muhurtta.' The commentator says it means that thirty Kalas 
make a Ghatika (or Ghari), and two Ghatikas a Muhurtta; but his explanation 
is gratuitous, and is at variance with more explicit passages elsewhere; as in 
the Matsya: 'A Muhurtta is thirty Kalas.' In these divisions of the twenty-four 
hours the Kurma, Markarideya, Matsya, Vayu, and Linga Purarias exactly 
agree with our authority. In Manu, I. 64, we have the same computation, with 
a difference in the first article, eighteen Nimeshas being one Kashtha. The 
Bhavishya P. follows Manu in that respect, and agrees in the rest with the 


Padma, which has, 


15 Nimeshas 

1 Kashtha 

30 Kashthas 

1 Kala 

30 Kalas 

1 Kshana 

12 Kshanas 

1 Muhurtta 

30 Muhurttas 

1 day and night. 


In the Mahabharata, Moksha Dherma, it is said that thirty Kalas and one-tenth, 

r 

or, according to the commentator, thirty Kalas and three Kashthas, make a 
Muhurtta. A still greater variety, however, occurs in the Bhagavata and in the 
Brahma Vaivartta P. These have, 


2 

Paramanus 

1 Ahu 

3 

Anus 

1 Trasarenu 

3 

Trasarenus 

1 Truti 

100 

Trutis 

1 Vedha 

3 

Vedhas 

1 Lava 

3 

Lavas 

1 Nimesha 

3 

Nimeshas 

1 Kshana 

5 

Kshanas 

1 Kashtha 

15 

r 

Kashthas 

1 Laghu 

15 

Laghus 

1 Narika 

2 

Narikas 

1 Muhurtta 

6 or 7 

Narikas 

1 Yama, or watch of the day or night. 


Allusions to this or either of the preceding computations, or to any other, have 

r r 

not been found in either of the other Puranas: yet the work of Gopala Bhatta, 
from which Mr. Colebrooke states he derived his information on the subject of 
Indian weights and measures (A. R. 5. 105), the Sankhya Parimana, cites the 
Varaha P. for a peculiar computation, and quotes another from the Bhavishya, 
different from that which occurs in the first chapter of that work, to which we 
have referred. The principle of the calculation adopted by the astronomical 




















































works is different: it is, 6 respirations (Prana) = 1 Vikala; 60 Vikalas = 1 
Danda; 60 Daridas =1 sydereal day. The Nimesha, which is the base of one of 
the Paurariic modes, is a twinkle of the eye of a man at rest; whilst the 
Paramanu, which is the origin of the other, and apparently more modern 
system, considering the works in which it occurs, is the time taken by a 
Paramanu, or mote in the sunbeam, to pass through a crevice in a shutter. 
Some indications of this calculation being in common currency, occur in the 
Hindustani terms Reriu (Trasareriu) and Lamhu (Laghu) in Indian horometry 
(A. R. 5. 81); whilst the more ordinary system seems derived from the 
astronomical works, being 60 Tilas = 1 Vipala; 60 Vipalas = 1 Pala; 60 Palas = 
1 Danda or Ghari. Ibid. 

04. These calculations of time are found in most of the Purarias, with some 
additions occasionally, of no importance, as that of the year of the seven 
Rishis, 3030 mortal years, and the year of Dhruva, 9090 such years, in the 
Linga P. In all essential points the computations accord, and the scheme, 
extravagant as it may appear, seems to admit of easy explanation. We have, in 
the first place, a computation of the years of the gods in the four ages, or, 


Krita 

Yuga 

4000 




Sandhya 

400 




Sandhyansa 

400 






4800 


Treta 

Yuga 

3000 




Sandhya 

300 




Sandhyansa 

300 






3600 


Dwapara 

Yuga 

2000 




Sandhya 

200 




Sandhyansa 

200 






2400 


Kali 

Yuga 

1000 




Sandhya 

100 




















































Sandhyansa 

100 






1200 






12000. 


If these divine years are converted into years of mortals, by multiplying them 
by 360, a year of men being a day of the gods, we obtain the years of which 
the Yugas of mortals are respectively said to consist: 


4800 x 360 

1.728.000 

3600 x 360 

1.296.000 

2400 x 360 

864.000 

1200 x 360 

432.000 


4.320.000 a Mahayuga. 


So that these periods resolve themselves into very simple elements: the notion 
of four ages in a deteriorating series expressed by descending arithmetical 
progression, as 4, 3, 2, 5; the conversion of units into thousands; and the 
mythological fiction, that these were divine years, each composed of 360 
years of men. It does not seem necessary to refer the invention to any 
astronomical computations, or to any attempt to represent actual chronology. 

05. The details of these, as occurring in each Manwantara, are given in the 
third book, c. 1 and 2. 

06. 'One and seventy enumerations of the four ages, with a surplus.' A similar 
reading occurs in several other Puranas, but none of them state of what the 
surplus or addition consists; but it is, in fact, the number of years required to 
reconcile two computations of the Kalpa. The most simple, and probably the 
original calculation of a Kalpa, is its being 1000 great ages, or ages of the 
gods: ### Bhavishya P. Then 4.320.000 years, or a divine age, x 1000 = 
4320.000.000 years, or a day or night of Brahma,. But a day of Brahma is also 
seventy-one times a great age multiplied by fourteen: 4.320.000 x 71 x 14= 














































4.294.080.000, or less than the preceding by 25.920.000; and it is to make up 
for this deficiency that a certain number of years must be added to the 
computation by Manwantaras. According to the Surya Siddhanta, as cited by 
Mr. Davis (A. R. 2. 231), this addition consists of a Sandhi to each 
Manwantara, equal to the Satya age, or 5.728.000 years; and one similar 
Sandhi at the commencement of the Kalpa: thus 4.320.000 x 71 = 306.720.000 
+ 1.728.000 = 308.448.000 x 14 = 4318.272.000 + 1.728.000 = 4320.000.000. 
The Pauranics, however, omit the Sandhi of the Kalpa, and add the whole 
compensation to the Manwantaras. The amount of this in whole numbers is 
1.851.428 in each Manwantara, or 4.320.000 x 71= 306.720.000 + 1.851.428 
= 308.571.428 x 14 = 4319.999.992; leaving a very small inferiority to the 
result of the calculation of a Kalpa by a thousand great ages. To provide for 
this deficiency, indeed, very minute subdivisions are admitted into the 
calculation; and the commentator on our text says, that the additional years, if 
of gods, are 5142 years, 10 months, 8 days, 4 watches, 2 Muhurttas, 8 Kalas, 
17 Kashthas, 2 Nimeshas, and l/7th; if of mortals, 1.851.428 years, 6 months, 
24 days, 12 Naris, 12 Kalas, 25 Kashthas, and 10 Nimeshas. It will be 
observed, that in the Kalpa we have the regular descending series 4, 3, 2, with 
cyphers multiplied ad libitum. 

07. The Brahma Vaivartta says 108 years, but this is unusual. Brahma's life is 
but a Nimesha of Krishna, according to that work; a Nimesha of Siva, 
according to the Saiva Purana. 

08. In the last book the Pararddha occurs as a very different measure of time, 
but it is employed here in its ordinary acceptation. 

09. In theory the Kalpas are infinite; as the Bhavishya: 'Excellent sages, 
thousands of millions of Kalpas have passed, and as many are to come.' In the 
Linga Purana, and others of the Saiva division, above thirty Kalpas are named, 
and some account given of several, but they are evidently sectarial 
embellishments. The only Kalpas usually specified are those which follow in 
the text: the one which was the last, or the Padma, and the present or Varaha. 
The first is also commonly called the Brahma; but the Bhagavata distinguishes 
the Brahma, considering it to be the first of Brahma's life, whilst the Padma 
was the last of the first Pararddha. The terms Mana, or great Kalpa, applied to 
the Padma, is attached to it only in a general sense; or, according to the 


commentator, because it comprises, as a minor Kalpa, that in which Brahma 
was born from a lotus. Properly, a great Kalpa is not a day, but a life of 
Brahma; as in the Brahma Vaivartta: 'Chronologers compute a Kalpa by the 
life of Brahma. Minor Kalpas, as Samvartta and the rest, are numerous.' Minor 
Kalpas here denote every period of destruction, or those in which the 
Samvartta wind, or other destructive agents, operate. Several other 
computations of time are found in different Purarias, but it will be sufficient to 
notice one which occurs in the Hari Vansa, as it is peculiar, and because it is 
not quite correctly given in M. Langlois' translation. It is the calculation of the 
Manava time, or time of a Menu. 


10 

divine years 

a day and night of a Menu. 

10 

Manava days 

his fortnight. 

10 

Manava fortn. 

his month. 

12 

Manava months 

his season. 

6 

Manava seasons 

his year. 


Accordingly the commentator says 72000 divine years make up his year. The 
French translation has, "dix annees des dieux font un jour de Menu; dix jours 
des dieux font un pakcha de Menu," &c. The error lies in the expression "jours 
des dieux," and is evidently a mere inadvertence; for if ten years make a day, 
ten days can scarcely make a fortnight. 























04. Chapter 


Narayana's appearance, in the beginning of the Kalpa, as the Varsha or boar: 
Prithivi (Earth) addresses him: he raises the world from beneath the waters: 
hymned by Sanandana and the Yogis. The earth floats on the ocean: divided into 
seven zones. The lower spheres of the universe restored. Creation renewed. 

MAITREYA.—Tell me, mighty sage, how, in the commencement of the (present) 
Kalpa, Narayana, who is named Brahma, created all existent things. 

PARASARA.—In what manner the divine Brahma, who is one with Narayana, 
created progeny, and is thence named the lord of progeny (Prajapati), the lord 
god, you shall hear. 

At the close of the past (or Padma) Kalpa, the divine Brahma, endowed with the 
quality of goodness, awoke from his night of sleep, and beheld the universe void. 
He, the supreme Narayana, the incomprehensible, the sovereign of all creatures, 
invested with the form of Brahma, the god without beginning, the creator of all 
things; of whom, with respect to his name Narayana, the god who has the form 
of Brahma, the imperishable origin of the world, this verse is repeated, "The 
waters are called Nara, because they were the offspring of Nara (the supreme 
spirit); and as in them his first (Ayana) progress (in the character of Brahma) 
took place, he is thence named Narayana (he whose place of moving was the 
waters)." He, the lord, concluding that within the waters lay the earth, and being 
desirous to raise it up, created another form for that purpose; and as in preceding 
Kalpas he had assumed the shape of a fish or a tortoise, so in this he took the 
figure of a boar. Having adopted a form composed of the sacrifices of the Vedas, 
for the preservation of the whole earth, the eternal, supreme, and universal soul, 
the great progenitor of created beings, eulogized by Sanaka and the other saints 
who dwell in the sphere of holy men (Janaloka); he, the supporter of spiritual 
and material being, plunged into the ocean. The goddess Earth, beholding him 
thus descending to the subterrene regions, bowed in devout adoration, and thus 
glorified the god:— 

Prithivi (Earth).—Hail to thee, who art all creatures; to thee, the holder of the 


mace and shell: elevate me now from this place, as thou hast upraised me in days 
of old. From thee have I proceeded; of thee do I consist; as do the skies, and all 
other existing things. Hail to thee, spirit of the supreme spirit; to thee, soul of 
soul; to thee, who art discrete and indiscrete matter; who art one with the 
elements and with time. Thou art the creator of all things, their preserver, and 
their destroyer, in the forms, oh lord, of Brahma, Vishnu, and Rudra, at the 
seasons of creation, duration, and dissolution. When thou hast devoured all 
things, thou reposest on the ocean that sweeps over the world, meditated upon, 
oh Govinda, by the wise. No one knoweth thy true nature, and the gods adore 
thee only in the forms it bath pleased thee to assume. They who are desirous of 
final liberation, worship thee as the supreme Brahma; and who that adores not 
Vasudeva, shall obtain emancipation? Whatever may be apprehended by the 
mind, whatever may be perceived by the senses, whatever may he discerned by 
the intellect, all is but a form of thee. I am of thee, upheld by thee; thou art my 
creator, and to thee I fly for refuge: hence, in this universe, Madhavi (the bride of 
Madhava or Vishnu) is my designation. Triumph to the essence of all wisdom, to 
the unchangeable, the imperishable: triumph to the eternal; to the indiscrete, to 
the essence of discrete things: to him who is both cause and effect; who is the 
universe; the sinless lord of sacrifice triumph. Thou art sacrifice; thou art the 
oblation; thou art the mystic Omkara; thou art the sacrificial fires; thou art the 
Vedas, and their dependent sciences; thou art, Hari, the object of all worship. 
The sun, the stars, the planets, the whole world; all that is formless, or that has 
form; all that is visible, or invisible; all, Purushottama, that I have said, or left 
unsaid; all this, Supreme, thou art. Hail to thee, again and again! hail! all hail! 

PARASARA.—The auspicious supporter of the world, being thus hymned by the 
earth, emitted a low murmuring sound, like the chanting of the Sanaa veda; and 
the mighty boar, whose eyes were like the lotus, and whose body, vast as the 
Nila mountain, was of the dark colour of the lotus leaves, uplifted upon his 
ample tusks the earth from the lowest regions. As he reared up his head, the 
waters shed from his brow purified the great sages, Sanandana and others, 
residing in the sphere of the saints. Through the indentations made by his hoofs, 
the waters rushed into the lower worlds with a thundering noise. Before his 
breath, the pious denizens of Janaloka were scattered, and the Munis sought for 
shelter amongst the bristles upon the scriptural body of the boar, trembling as he 
rose up, supporting the earth, and dripping with moisture. Then the great sages, 
Sanandana and the rest, residing continually in the sphere of saints, were 



inspired with delight, and bowing lowly they praised the stern-eyed upholder of 
the earth. 

The Yogis.—Triumph, lord of lords supreme; Kesava, sovereign of the earth, the 
wielder of the mace, the shell, the discus, and the sword: cause of production, 
destruction, and existence. THOU ART, oh god: there is no other supreme 
condition, but thou. Thou, lord, art the person of sacrifice: for thy feet are the 
Vedas; thy tusks are the stake to which the victim is bound; in thy teeth are the 
offerings; thy mouth is the altar; thy tongue is the fire; and the hairs of thy body 
are the sacrificial grass. Thine eyes, oh omnipotent, are day and night; thy head 
is the seat of all, the place of Brahma; thy mane is all the hymns of the Vedas; 
thy nostrils are all oblations: oh thou, whose snout is the ladle of oblation; whose 
deep voice is the chanting of the Sanaa veda; whose body is the hall of sacrifice; 
whose joints are the different ceremonies; and whose ears have the properties of 
both voluntary and obligatory rites do thou, who art eternal, who art in size a 
mountain, be propitious. We acknowledge thee, who hast traversed the world, oh 
universal form, to be the beginning, the continuance, and the destruction of all 
things: thou art the supreme god. Have pity on us, oh lord of conscious and 
unconscious beings. The orb of the earth is seen seated on the tip of thy tusks, as 
if thou hadst been sporting amidst a lake where the lotus floats, and hadst borne 
away the leaves covered with soil. The space between heaven and earth is 
occupied by thy body, oh thou of unequalled glory, resplendent with the power 
of pervading the universe, oh lord, for the benefit of all. Thou art the aim of all: 
there is none other than thee, sovereign of the world: this is thy might, by which 
all things, fixed or movable, are pervaded. This form, which is now beheld, is 
thy form, as one essentially with wisdom. Those who have not practised 
devotion, conceive erroneously of the nature of the world. The ignorant, who do 
not perceive that this universe is of the nature of wisdom, and judge of it as an 
object of perception only, are lost in the ocean of spiritual ignorance. But they 
who know true wisdom, and whose minds are pure, behold this whole world as 
one with divine knowledge, as one with thee, oh god. Be favourable, oh 
universal spirit: raise up this earth, for the habitation of created beings. 
Inscrutable deity, whose eyes are like lotuses, give us felicity. Oh lord, thou art 
endowed with the quality of goodness: raise up, Govinda, this earth, for the 
general good. Grant us happiness, oh lotus-eyed. May this, thy activity in 
creation, be beneficial to the earth. Salutation to thee. Grant us happiness, oh 
lotus-eyed. 



PARASARA.—The supreme being thus eulogized, upholding the earth, raised it 
quickly, and placed it on the summit of the ocean, where it floats like a mighty 
vessel, and from its expansive surface does not sink beneath the waters. Then, 
having levelled the earth, the great eternal deity divided it into portions, by 
mountains: he who never wills in vain, created, by his irresistible power, those 
mountains again upon the earth which had been consumed at the destruction of 
the world. Having then divided the earth into seven great portions or continents, 
as it was before, he constructed in like manner the four (lower) spheres, earth, 
sky, heaven, and the sphere of the sages (Maharloka). Thus Hari, the four-faced 
god, invested with the quality of activity, and taking the form of Brahma, 
accomplished the creation: but he (Brahma) is only the instrumental cause of 
things to be created; the things that are capable of being created arise from 
nature as a common material cause: with exception of one instrumental cause 
alone, there is no need of any other cause, for (imperceptible) substance becomes 
perceptible substance according to the powers with which it is originally imbued. 


Footnotes 

01. This creation is of the secondary order, or Pratiserga; water, and even the 
earth, being in existence, and consequently having been preceded by the 
creation of Mahat and the elements. It is also a different Pratiserga from 
that described by Manu, in which Swayambhu first creates the waters, 
then the egg: one of the simplest forms, and perhaps therefore one of the 
earliest in which the tradition occurs. 

02. This is the well known verse of Menu, I. 8, rendered by Sir Wm. Jones, 
"The waters are called Nara, because they were the production of Nara, 
or 'the spirit' of God; and since they were his first Ayana, or place of 
motion, he thence is named Narayaria, or 'moving on the waters.'" Now 
although there can be little doubt that this tradition is in substance the 
same as that of Genesis, the language of the translation is perhaps more 

scriptural than is quite warranted. The waters, it is said in the text of 

// 

Manu, were the progeny of Nara, which Kulluka Bhatta explains 
Paramatma, the supreme soul; that is, they were the first productions of 


God in creation. Ayana, instead of 'place of motion,' is explained by 
Asraya, place of abiding.' Narayana means, therefore, he whose place of 
abiding was the deep. The verse occurs in several of the Puranas, in 
general in nearly the same words, and almost always as a quotation, as in 
our text The Linga, Vayu, and Markandeya Puranas, citing the same, 
have a somewhat different reading; or, 'Apa (is the same as) Nara, or 
bodies (Tanava); such, we have heard (from the Vedas), is the meaning of 
Apa. He who sleeps in them, is thence called Narayana.' The ordinary 
sense of Tanu is either 'minute' or 'body,' nor does it occur amongst the 
synonymes of water in the Nirukta of the Vedas. It may perhaps be 
intended to say, that Nara or Apa has the meaning of 'bodily forms,' in 
which spirit is enshrined, and of which the waters, with Vishnu resting 
upon them, are a type; for there is much mysticism in the Puranas in 
which the passage thus occurs. Even in them, however, it is introduced in 
the usual manner, by describing the world as water alone, and Vishnu 
reposing upon the deep: ### Vayu P. The Bhagavata has evidently 
attempted to explain the ancient text: 'When the embodied god in the 
beginning divided the mundane egg, and issued forth, then, requiring an 
abiding-place, he created the waters: the pure created the pure. In them, 
his own created, he abode for a thousand years, and thence received the 
name of Narayana: the waters being the product of the embodied deity:' i. 
e. they were the product of Nara or Vishnu, as the first male or Virat, and 
were therefore termed Nara: and from there being his Ayana or Sthana, 
his 'abiding place,' comes his epithet of Narayana. 

03. The Varaha form was chosen, says the Vayu P., because it is an animal 
delighting to sport in water, but it is described in many Puranas, as it is in 
the Vishnu, as a type of the ritual of the Vedas, as we shall have further 
occasion to remark. The elevation of the earth from beneath the ocean in 
this form, was, therefore, probably at first an allegorical representation of 
the extrication of the world from a deluge of iniquity by the rites of 
religion. Geologists may perhaps suspect, in the original and unmystified 
tradition, an allusion to a geological fact, or the existence of lacustrine 
mammalia in the early periods of the earth. 

04. Yajnapati, 'the bestower of the beneficial results of sacrifices.' 

05. Yajnapurusha, 'the male or soul of sacrifice;' explained by Yajnamurtti, 
'the form or personification of sacrifice;' or Yajnaradhya 'he who is to be 
propitiated by it.' 



06. Varaha Avatara. The description of the figure of the boar is much more 
particularly detailed in other Puranas. As in the Vayu: "The boar was ten 
Yojanas in breadth, a thousand Yojanas high; of the colour of a dark 
cloud; and his roar was like thunder; his bulk was vast as a mountain; his 
tusks were white, sharp, and fearful; fire flashed from his eyes like 
lightning, and he was radiant as the sun; his shoulders were round, flit, 
and large; he strode along like a powerful lion; his haunches were fat, his 
loins were slender, and his body was smooth and beautiful." The Matsya 
P. describes the Varaha in the same words, with one or two unimportant 
varieties. The Bhagavata indulges in that amplification which marks its 
more recent composition, and describes the Varaha as issuing from the 
nostrils of Brahma, at first of the size of the thumb, or an inch long, and 
presently increasing to the stature of an elephant. That work also subjoins 
a legend of the death of the demon Hiranyaksha, who in a preceding 
existence was one of Vishnu's doorkeepers, at his palace in Vaikuntha. 
Having refused admission to a party of Munis, they cursed him, and he 
was in consequence born as one of the sons of Diti. When the earth, 
oppressed by the weight of the mountains, sunk down into the waters, 
Vishnu was beheld in the subterrene regions, or Rasatala, by Hiranyaksha 
in the act of carrying it off. The demon claimed the earth, and defied 
Vishnu to combat; and a conflict took place, in which Hiranyaksha was 
slain. This legend has not been met with in any other Puraria, and 
certainly does not occur in the chief of them, any more than in our text. 
In the Moksha Dherma of the Mahabharata, e.35, Vishnu destroys the 
demons in the form of the Varaha, but no particular individual is 
specified, nor does the elevation of the earth depend upon their 
discomfiture. The Kalika Upapuraria has an absurd legend of a conflict 
between Siva as a Sarabha, a fabulous animal, and Vishnu as the Varaha, 
in which the latter suffers himself and his offspring begotten upon earth 
to be slain. 

07. This, which is nothing more than the developement of the notion that the 
Varaha incarnation typifies the ritual of the Vedas, is repeated in most of 
the Puranas in the same or nearly the same words. 

08. This seems equivalent to the ancient notion of a plastic nature: "All parts 
of matter, by reason of a certain life in them, being supposed able to form 
themselves artificially and methodically to the greatest advantage of their 
present respective capabilities." This, which Cudworth (c. III.) calls 


hylozoism, is not incompatible with an active creator: "not that he 
should, unbecoming God; but, as in the case of Brahma and other 
subordinate agents, that they should occasion the various developments 
of crude nature to take place, by supplying that will, of which nature 
itself is incapable. Action being once instituted by an instrumental 
medium, or by the will of an intellectual agent, it is continued by powers 
or a vitality inherent in nature or the matter of creation itself. The 
efficiency of such subordinate causes was advocated by Plato, Aristotle, 
and others; and the opinion of Zeno, as stated by Laertius, might be taken 
for a translation of some such passage as that in our text: 'Nature is a 
habit moved from itself, according to seminal principles; perfecting and 
containing those several things which in determinate times are produced 
from it, and acting agreeably to that from which it was secreted.' Intell. 
System, I. 328. 'So the commentator illustrates our text by observing that 
the cause of the budding of rice is in its own seed, and its developement 
is from itself; though its growth takes place only at a determinate season, 
in consequence of the instrumental agency of the rain. 




05. Chapter 


Vishnu as Brahma creates the world. General characteristics of creation. Brahma 
meditates, and gives origin to, immovable things, animals, gods, men. Specific 
creation of nine kinds; Mahat, Tanmatra, Aindriya, inanimate objects, animals, 
gods, men, Anugraha, and Kaumara. More particular account of creation. Origin 
of different orders of beings from Brahma's body under different conditions; and 
of the Vedas from his mouths. All things created again as they existed in a 
former Kalpa. 

MAITREYA.—Now unfold to me, Brahman, how this deity created the gods, 
sages, progenitors, demons, men, animals, trees, and the rest, that abide on earth, 
in heaven, or in the waters: how Brahma at creation made the world with the 
qualities, the characteristics, and the forms of things. 

PARASARA.—I will explain to you, Maitreya, listen attentively, how this deity, 
the lord of all, created the gods and other beings. 

Whilst he (Brahma) formerly, in the beginning of the Kalpas, was. meditating on 
creation, there appeared a creation beginning with ignorance, and consisting of 
darkness. From that great being appeared fivefold Ignorance, consisting of 
obscurity, illusion, extreme illusion, gloom, utter darkness. The creation of the 
creator thus plunged in abstraction, was the fivefold (immovable) world, without 
intellect or reflection, void of perception or sensation, incapable of feeling, and 
destitute of motion. Since immovable things were first created, this is called the 
first creation. Brahma, beholding that it was defective, designed another; and 
whilst he thus meditated, the animal creation was manifested, to the products of 
which the term Tiryaksrotas is applied, from their nutriment following a winding 
course. These were called beasts, &c., and their characteristic was the quality of 
darkness, they being destitute of knowledge, uncontrolled in their conduct, and 
mistaking error for wisdom; being formed of egotism and self-esteem, labouring 
under the twenty-eight kinds of imperfection, manifesting inward sensations, and 
associating with each other (according to their kinds). 

Beholding this creation also imperfect, Brahma again meditated, and a third 


creation appeared, abounding with the quality of goodness, termed Urddhasrotas. 
The beings thus produced in the Urddhasrotas creation were endowed with 
pleasure and enjoyment, unencumbered internally or externally, and luminous 
within and without. This, termed the creation of immortals, was the third 
performance of Brahma, who, although well pleased with it, still found it 
incompetent to fulfil his end. Continuing therefore his meditations, there sprang, 
in consequence of his infallible purpose, the creation termed Arvaksrotas, from 
indiscrete nature. The products of this are termed Arvaksrotasas, from the 
downward current (of their nutriment). They abound with the light of 
knowledge, but the qualities of darkness and of foulness predominate. Hence 
they are afflicted by evil, and are repeatedly impelled to action. They have 
knowledge both externally and internally, and are the instruments (of 
accomplishing the object of creation, the liberation of soul). These creatures 
were mankind. 

I have thus explained to you, excellent Muni, six creations. The first creation 
was that of Mahat or Intellect, which is also called the creation of Brahma. The 
second was that of the rudimental principles (Tanmatras), thence termed the 
elemental creation (Bhuta serga). The third was the modified form of egotism, 
termed the organic creation, or creation of the senses (Aindriyaka). These three 
were the Prakrita creations, the developements of indiscrete nature, preceded by 
the indiscrete principle. The fourth or fundamental creation (of perceptible 
things) was that of inanimate bodies. The fifth, the Tairyag yonya creation, was 
that of animals. The sixth was the Urddhasrotas creation, or that of the divinities. 
The creation of the Arvaksrotas beings was the seventh, and was that of man. 
There is an eighth creation, termed Anugraha, which possesses both the qualities 
of goodness and darkness. Of these creations, five are secondary, and three are 
primary. But there is a ninth, the Kaumara creation, which is both primary and 
secondary. These are the nine creations of the great progenitor of all, and, both as 
primary and secondary, are the radical causes of the world, proceeding from the 
sovereign creator. What else dost thou desire to hear? 

MAITREYA. Thou hast briefly related to me, Muni, the creation of the gods and 
other beings: I am desirous, chief of sages, to hear from thee a more ample 
account of their creation. 

PARASARA.—Created beings, although they are destroyed (in their individual 



forms) at the periods of dissolution, yet, being affected by the good or evil acts 
of former existence, they are never exempted from their consequences; and when 
Brahma creates the world anew, they are the progeny of his will, in the fourfold 
condition of gods, men, animals, or inanimate things. Brahma then, being 
desirous of creating the four orders of beings, termed gods, demons, progenitors, 
and men, collected his mind into itself. Whilst thus concentrated, the quality of 
darkness pervaded his body; and thence the demons (the Asuras) were first born, 
issuing from his thigh. Brahma then abandoned that form which was, composed 
of the rudiment of darkness, and which, being deserted by him, became night. 
Continuing to create, but assuming a different, shape, he experienced pleasure; 
and thence from his mouth proceeded the gods, endowed with the quality of 
goodness. The form abandoned by him, became day, in which the good quality 
predominates; and hence by day the gods are most powerful, and by night the 
demons. He next adopted another person, in which the rudiment of goodness 
also prevailed; and thinking of himself, as the father of the world, the 
progenitors (the Pitris) were born from his side. The body, when he abandoned, 
it, became the Sandhya (or evening twilight), the interval between day and night. 
Brahma then assumed another person, pervaded by the quality of foulness; and 
from this, men, in whom foulness (or passion) predominates, were produced. 
Quickly abandoning that body, it became morning twilight, or the dawn. At the 
appearance of this light of day, men feel most vigour; while the progenitors are 
most powerful in the evening season. In this manner, Maitreya, Jyotsna (dawn), 
Ratri (night), Ahar (day), and Sandhya (evening), are the four bodies of Brahma 
invested by the three qualities. 

Next from Brahma, in a form composed of the quality of foulness, was produced 
hunger, of whom anger was born: and the god put forth in darkness beings 
emaciate with hunger, of hideous aspects, and with long beards. Those beings 
hastened to the deity. Such of them as exclaimed, Oh preserve us! were thence 
called Rakshasas others, who cried out, Let us eat, were denominated from that 
expression Yakshas . Beholding them so disgusting, the hairs of Brahma were 
shrivelled up, and first falling from his head, were again renewed upon it: from 
their falling they became serpents, called Sarpa from their creeping, and Ahi 
because they had deserted the head. The creator of the world, being incensed, 
then created fierce beings, who were denominated goblins, Bhutas, malignant 
fiends and eaters of flesh. The Gandharbas were next born, imbibing melody: 
drinking of the goddess of speech, they were born, and thence their appellation. 



The divine Brahma, influenced by their material energies, having created these 
beings, made others of his own will. Birds he formed from his vital vigour; 
sheep from his breast; goats from his mouth; kine from his belly and sides; and 
horses, elephants, Sarabhas, Gayals, deer, camels, mules, antelopes, and other 
animals, from his feet: whilst from the hairs of his body sprang herbs, roots, and 
fruits. 

Brahma having created, in the commencement of the Kalpa, various plants, 
employed them in sacrifices, in the beginning of the Treta age. Animals were 
distinguished into two classes, domestic (village) and wild (forest): the first class 
contained the cow, the goat, the hog, the sheep, the horse, the ass, the mule: the 
latter, all beasts of prey, and many animals with cloven hoofs, the elephant, and 
the monkey. The fifth order were the birds; the sixth, aquatic animals; and the 
seventh, reptiles and insects. 

From his eastern mouth Brahma then created the Gayatri metre, the Rig veda, 
the collection of hymns termed Trivrit, the Rathantara portion of the Sanaa veda, 

r 

and the Agnishtoma sacrifice: from his southern mouth he created the Yajur 

_ r 

veda, the Trishtubh metre, the collection of hymns called Panchadasa, the Vrihat 
Sanaa, and the portion of the Sanaa veda termed Uktha: from his western mouth 
he created the Sanaa veda, the Jayati metre, the collection of hymns termed 
Saptadasa, the portion of the Sanaa called Vairupa, and the Atiratra sacrifice: and 
from his northern mouth he created the Ekavinsa collection of hymns, the 

r r r 

Atharva veda, the Aptoryama rite, the Anushtubh metre, and the Vairaja portion 
of the Sanaa veda. 

In this manner all creatures, great or small, proceeded from his limbs. The great 
progenitor of the world having formed the gods, demons, and Pitris, created, in 
the commencement of the Kalpa, the Yakshas, Pisachas (goblins), Gandharbas 
and the troops of Apsarasas the nymphs of heaven, Naras (centaurs, or beings 
with the limbs of horses and human bodies) and Kinnaras (beings with the heads 
of horses), Rakshasas, birds, beasts, deer, serpents, and all things permanent or 
transitory, movable or immovable. This did the divine Brahma, the first creator 
and lord of all: and these things being created, discharged the same functions as 
they had fulfilled in a previous creation, whether malignant or benign, gentle or 
cruel, good or evil, true or false; and accordingly as they are actuated by such 



propensities will be their conduct. 


And the creator displayed infinite variety in the objects of sense, in the 
properties of living things, and in the forms of bodies: he determined in the 
beginning, by the authority of the Vedas, the names and forms and functions of 
all creatures, and of the gods; and the names and appropriate offices of the 
Rishis, as they also are read in the Vedas. In like manner as the products of the 
seasons designate in periodical revolution the return of the same season, so do 
the same circumstances indicate the recurrence of the same Yuga, or age; and 
thus, in the beginning of each Kalpa, does Brahma repeatedly create the world, 
possessing the power that is derived from the will to create, and assisted by the 
natural and essential faculty of the object to be created. 


Footnotes 

01. The terms here employed are for qualities, Gunas; which, as we have 
already noticed, are those of goodness, foulness, and darkness. The 
characteristics, or Swabhavas, are the inherent properties of the qualities, 
by which they act, as, soothing, terrific, or stupifying: and the forms, 
Swarupas, are the distinctions of biped, quadruped, brute, bird, fish, and 
the like. 

02. Or Tamas, Moha, Mahamoha, Tamisra, Andhatamisra; they are the five 
kinds of obstruction, viparyyaya, of soul's liberation, according to the 
Sankhya: they are explained to be, 1. The belief of material substance 
being the same with spirit; 2. Notion of property or possession, and 
consequent attachment to objects, as children and the like, as being one's 
own; 3. Addiction to the enjoyments of sense; 4. Impatience or wrath; 
and 5. Fear of privation or death. They are called in the Patanjala 
philosophy, the five afflictions, Klesa, but are similarly explained by 
Avidya, 'ignorance;' Asmita, 'selfishness,' literally 'I-am-ness;' Riga 
'love;' Dwesha, 'hatred;' and Abhinivesa, 'dread of temporal suffering.' 
Sankhya Karika. This creation by Brahma in the Varaha Kalpa begins in 
the same way, and in the same words, in most of the Puranas. The 
Bhagavata reverses the order of these five products, and gives them, 


Andhatamisra, Tamisra, Mahamoha, Moha, and Tamas; a variation 
obviously more immethodical than the usual reading of the text, and 
adopted, no doubt, merely for the sake of giving the passage an air of 
originality. 

03. This is not to be confounded with elementary creation, although the 
description would very well apply to that of crude nature, or Pradhana; 
but, as will be seen presently, we have here to do with final productions, 
or the forms in which the previously created elements and faculties are 
more or less perfectly aggregated. The first class of these forms is here 
said to be immovable things; that is, the mineral and vegetable kingdoms; 
for the solid earth, with its mountains and rivers and seas, was already 
prepared for their reception. The 'fivefold' immovable creation is indeed, 
according to the comment, restricted to vegetables, five orders of which 
are enumerated, or, 1. trees; 2. shrubs; 3. climbing plants; 4. creepers; and 
5. grasses. 

04. Tiryak, 'crooked;' and Srotas, 'a canal.' 

05. Twenty-eight kinds of Badhas, which in the Sankhya system mean 
disabilities, as defects of the senses, blindness, deafness, &c.; and defects 
of intellect, discontent, ignorance, and the like. S. Karika. In place of 
Badha, however, the more usual reading, as in the Bhagavata, Varaha, 
and Markarideya Purarias, is Vidha, 'kind,' 'sort,' as ###, implying twenty- 
eight sorts of animals. These are thus specified in the Bhagavata, III. 10: 
Six kinds have single hoofs, nine have double or cloven hoofs, and 
thirteen have five claws or nails instead of hoofs. The first are the horse, 
the mule, the ass, the yak, the sarabha, and the gaura, or white deer. The 
second are the cow, the goat, the buffalo, the hog, the gayal, the black 
deer, the antelope, the camel, and the sheep. The last are the dog, shacal, 
wolf, tiger, cat, hare, porcupine, lion, monkey, elephant, tortoise, lizard, 
and alligator. 

06. Urddha, 'above,' and Srotas, as before; their nourishment being derived 
from the exterior, not from the interior of the body: according to the 
commentator; ### as a text of the Vedas has it; 'Through satiety derived 
from even beholding ambrosia.' 

07. Arvak, 'downwards,' and Srotas, 'canal.' 

08. This reckoning is not very easily reconciled with the creations described; 
for, as presently enumerated, the stages of creation are seven. The 
commentator, however, considers the Urddhasrotas creation, or that of 




the superhuman beings, to be the same with that of the Indriyas, or senses 
over which they preside; by which the number is reduced to six. 

09. This creation being the work of the supreme spirit, ### according to the 
commentator; or it might have been understood to mean, that Brahma 
was then created, being, as we have seen, identified with Mahat, 'active 
intelligence,' or the operating will of the Supreme. 

10. The text is, ### which is, as rendered in the text, 'creation preceded by, or 
beginning with Buddhi, intelligence.' The rules of euphony would 
however admit of a mute negative being inserted, or 'preceded by 
ignorance;' that is, by the chief principle, crude nature or Pradhana, 
which is one with ignorance: but this seems to depend on notions of a 
later date, and more partial adoption, than those generally prevailing in 
our authority; and the first reading therefore has been preferred. It is also 
to be observed, that the first unintellectual creation was that of 
immovable objects (as in ), the original of which is, ### and all 
ambiguity of construction is avoided. The reading is also established by 
the text of the Linga Purana, which enumerates the different series of 
creation in the words of the Vishnu, except in this passage, which is there 
transposed, with a slight variation of the reading. Instead of ### it is ### 
'The first creation was that of Mahat: Intellect being the first in 
manifestation.' The reading of the Vayu P. is still more tautological, but 
confirms that here preferred: See also n. 12. 

11. The Anugraha creation, of which no notice has been found in the 
Mahabharata, seems to have been borrowed from the Sankhya 
philosophy. It is more particularly described in the Padma, Markandeya, 
Linga, and Matsya Puranas; as, 'The fifth is the Anugraha creation, which 
is subdivided into four kinds; by obstruction, disability, perfectness, and 
acquiescence.' This is the Pratyaya sarga, or intellectual creation, of the 
Sankhyas (S. Karika, v. 46.); the creation of which we have a notion, or 
to which we give assent (Anugraha), in contradistinction to organic 
creation, or that existence of which we have sensible perception. In its 
specific subdivisions it is the notion of certain inseparable properties in 
the four different orders of beings: obstruction or stolidity in inanimate 
things; inability or imperfection in animals; perfectibility in man; and 
acquiescence or tranquil enjoyment in gods. So also the Vayu P.: ### 

12. Or Vaikrita, derived mediately from the first principle, through its 
Vikritis, 'productions' or 'developements;' and Prakrita, derived more 







immediately from the chief principle itself. Mahat and the two forms of 
Ahankara, or the rudimental elements and the senses, constitute the latter 
class; inanimate beings, &c. compose the former: or the latter are 
considered as the work of Brahma, whilst the three first are evolved from 
Pradhana. So the Vayu: 'The three creations beginning with Intelligence 
are elemental; but the six creations which proceed from the series of 
which Intellect is the first are the work of Brahma'. 

13. We must have recourse here also to other Puranas, for the elucidation of 
this term. The Kaumara creation is the creation of Rudra or Nilalohita, a 
form of Siva, by Brahma, which is subsequently described in our text, 
and of certain other mind-born sons of Brahma, of whose birth the 
Vishnu P. gives no further account: they are elsewhere termed 
Sanatkumara, Sananda, Sanaka, and Sanatana, with sometimes a fifth, 
Ribhu, added. These, declining to create progeny, remained, as the name 
of the first implies, ever boys, kumaras; that is, ever pure and innocent; 
whence their creation is called the Kaumara. Thus the Vayu: ###. And 
the Linga has, 'Being ever as he was born, he is here called a youth; and 
hence his name is well known as Sanatkumara.' This authority makes 
Sanatkumara and Ribhu the two first born of all, whilst the text of the 
Hari Vansa limits the primogeniture to Sanatkumara. In another place, 
however, it enumerates apparently six, or the above four with Sana and 
either. Ribhu or another Sanatana; for the passage is corrupt. The French 
translation ascribes a share in creation to Sanatkumara: 'Les sept 
Prajapatis, Roudra, Scanda, et Sanatkaumara, se mirent a produire les 
etres repandant partout l’inepuisable energie de dieu.' The original is, 
Sankshipya is not 'repandant,' but 'restraining;' and Tishthatah being in 
the dual number, relates of course to only two of the series. The correct 
rendering is, 'These seven (Prajapatis) created progeny, and so did Rudra; 
but Skanda and Sanatkumara, restraining their power, abstained (from 
creation).' So the commentator: ###. These sages, however, live as long 
as Brahma, and they are only created by him in the first Kalpa, although 
their generation is very commonly, but inconsistently, introduced in the 
Varaha or Padma Kalpas. This creation, says the text, is both primary 
(Prakrita) and secondary (Vaikrita). It is the latter, according to the 
commentator, as regards the origin of these saints from Brahma: it is the 
former as affects Rudra, who, though proceeding from Brahma, in a 
certain form was in essence equally an immediate production of the first 




principle. These notions, the birth of Rudra and the saints, seem to have 
been borrowed from the Saivas, and to have been awkwardly engrafted 
upon the Vaishnava system. Sanatkumara and his brethren are always 
described in the Saiva Puranas as Yogis: as the Kurma, after enumerating 
them, adds, 'These five, oh Brahmans, were Yogis, who acquired entire 
exemption from passion:' and the Hari Vansa, although rather Vaishnava 
than Saiva, observes, that the Yogis celebrate these six, along with 
Kapila, in Yoga works. The idea seems to have been amplified also in the 
Saiva works; for the Linga P. describes the repeated birth of Siva, or 
Vamadeva, as a Kumara, or boy, from Brahma, in each Kalpa, who again 
becomes four. Thus in the twenty-ninth Kalpa Swetalohita is the Kumara, 
and he becomes Sananda, Nandana, Viswananda, Upanandana; all of a 
white complexion: in the thirtieth the Kumara becomes Virajas, Vivahu, 
Visoka, Viswabhavana; all of a red colour: in the thirty-first he becomes 
four youths of a yellow colour: and in the thirty-second the four Kumaras 
were black. All these are, no doubt, comparatively recent additions to the 
original notion of the birth of Rudra and the Kumaras; itself obviously a 
sectarial innovation upon the primitive doctrine of the birth of the 
Prajapatis, or will-born sons of Brahma. 

14. These reiterated, and not always very congruous accounts of the creation 
are explained by the Puranas as referring to different Kalpas, or 
renovations of the world, and therefore involving no incompatibility. A 
better reason for their appearance is the probability that they have been 
borrowed from different original authorities. The account that follows is 
evidently modified by the Yogi Saivas, by its general mysticism, and by 
the expressions with which it begins: 'Collecting his mind into itself,' 
according to the comment, is the performance of the Yoga (Yuyuje). The 
term Ambhansi, lit. 'waters,' for the four orders of beings, gods, demons, 
men, and Pitris, is also a peculiar, and probably mystic term. The 
commentator says it occurs in the Vedas as a synonyme of gods. The 
Vayu Puraria derives it from 'to shine,'because the different orders of 
beings shine or flourish severally by moonlight, night, day, and twilight: 
&c. 

15. This account is given in several other Puranas: in the Kurma with more 
simplicity; in the Padma, Linga, and Vayu with more detail. The 
Bhagavata, as usual, amplifies still more copiously, and mixes up much 
absurdity with the account. Thus the person of Sandhya, 'evening 


twilight,' is thus described: "She appeared with eyes rolling with passion, 
whilst her lotus-like feet sounded with tinkling ornaments: a muslin vest 
depended from her waist, secured by a golden zone: her breasts were 
protuberant, and close together; her nose was elegant; her tongue 
beautiful; her face was bright with smiles, and she modestly concealed it 
with the skirts of her robe; whilst the dark curls clustered round her 
brow." The Asuras address her, and win her to become their bride. To the 
four forms of our text, the same work adds, Tandri, 'sloth;' Jrimbhika, 
'yawning;' Nidra, 'sleep;' Unmada, 'insanity;' Antarddhana, 
'disappearance;' Pratibimba, 'reflexion;' which become the property of 
Pisachas, Kinnaras, Bhutas, Gandherbas, Vidyadharas, Sadhyas, Pitris, 
and Menus. The notions of night, day, twilight, and moonlight being 
derived from Brahma, seem to have originated with the Vedas. Thus the 
commentator on the Bhagavata observes, 'That which was his body, and 
was left, was darkness: this is the Sruti.' A11 the authorities place night 
before day, and the Asuras or Titans before the gods, in the order of 
appearance; as did Hesiod and other ancient theogonists. 

16. From Raksha, 'to preserve' 

17. From Yaksha, 'to eat' 

18. From Srip, serpo, 'to creep,' and from Ha, 'to abandon.' 

19. Gam dhayantah, 'drinking speech.' 

20. This and the preceding enumeration of the origin of vegetables and 
animals occurs in several Puranas, precisely in the same words. The 
Linga adds a specification of the Aranya, or wild animals, which are said 
to be the buffalo, gayal, bear, monkey, sarabha, wolf, and lion. 

21. This specification of the parts of the Vedas that proceed from Brahma 
occurs, in the same words, in the Vayu, Linga, Kurma, Padma, and 
Markarideya Puranas. The Bhagavata offers some important varieties: 
"From his eastern and other mouths he created the Rich, Yajush, Sama, 
and Atharvan vedas; the Sastra, or 'the unuttered incantation;' Ijya, 
'oblation;' Stuti and Stoma, 'prayers' and 'hymns;' and Prayaschitta, 
'expiation' or 'sacred philosophy' (Brahma): also the Vedas of medicine, 
arms, music, and mechanics; and the Itihasas and Puranas, which are a 
fifth Veda: also the portions of the Vedas called Sorasi, Uktha, Purishi, 

r r 

'Agnishtut, Aptoryama, Atiratra, Vajapeya, Gosava; the four parts of 
virtue, purity, liberality, piety, and truth; the orders of life, and their 
institutes and different religious rites and professions; and the sciences of 


logic, ethics, and polity. The mystic words and monosyllable proceeded 
from his heart; the metre Ushnih from the hairs of his body; Gayatri from 
his skin; Trishtubh from his flesh; Anushtubh from his tendons; Jagati 
from his bones; Pankti from his marrow; Vrihati from his breath. The 
consonants were his life; the vowels his body; the sibilants his senses; the 
semivowels his vigour." This mysticism, although perhaps expanded and 
amplified by the Pauranics, appears to originate with the Vedas: as in the 
text, 'The metre was of the tendons.' The different portions of the Vedas 
specified in the text are yet, for the most part, uninvestigated. 




06. Chapter 


Origin of the four castes: their primitive state. Progress of society. Different 
kinds of grain. Efficacy of sacrifice. Duties of men: regions assigned them after 
death. 

MAITREYA.—Thou hast briefly noticed, illustrious sage, the creation termed 
Arvaksrotas, or that of mankind: now explain to me more fully how Brahma 
accomplished it; how he created the four different castes; what duties he 
assigned to the Brahmans and the rest. 

PARASARA.--Formerly, oh best of Brahmans, when the truth-meditating 
Brahma was desirous of creating the world, there sprang from his mouth beings 
especially endowed with the quality of goodness; others from his breast, 
pervaded by the quality of foulness; others from his thighs, in whom foulness 
and darkness prevailed; and others from his feet, in whom the quality of 
darkness predominated. These were, in succession, beings of the several castes, 
Brahmans, Kshetriyas, Vaisyas, and Sudras, produced from the mouth, the 
breast, the thighs, and the feet of Brahma. These he created for the performance 
of sacrifices, the four castes being the fit instruments of their celebration. By 
sacrifices, oh thou who knowest the truth, the gods are nourished; and by the rain 
which they bestow, mankind are supported and thus sacrifices, the source of 
happiness, are performed by pious men, attached to their duties, attentive to 
prescribed obligations, and walking in the paths of virtue. Men acquire (by them) 
heavenly fruition, or final felicity: they go, after death, to whatever sphere they 
aspire to, as the consequence of their human nature. The beings who were 
created by Brahma, of these four castes, were at first endowed with 
righteousness and perfect faith; they abode wherever they pleased, unchecked by 
any impediment; their hearts were free from guile; they were pure, made free 
from soil, by observance of sacred institutes. In their sanctified minds Hari 
dwelt; and they were filled with perfect wisdom, by which they contemplated the 
glory of Vishnu. After a while (after the Treta age had continued for some 
period), that portion of Hari which has been described as one with Kala (time) 
infused into created beings sin, as yet feeble though formidable, or passion and 
the like: the impediment of soul's liberation, the seed of iniquity, sprung from 


darkness and desire. The innate perfectness of human nature was then no more 
evolved: the eight kinds of perfection, Rasollasa and the rest, were impaired and 
these being enfeebled, and sin gaining strength, mortals were afflicted with pain, 
arising from susceptibility to contrasts, as heat and cold, and the like. They 
therefore constructed places of refuge, protected by trees, by mountains, or by 
water; surrounded them by a ditch or a wall, and formed villages and cities; and 
in them erected appropriate dwellings, as defences against the sun and the cold. 
Having thus provided security against the weather, men next began to employ 
themselves in manual labour, as a means of livelihood, (and cultivated) the 
seventeen kinds of useful grain—rice, barley, wheat, millet, sesamum, panic, and 
various sorts of lentils, beans, and pease. These are the kinds cultivated for 
domestic use: but there are fourteen kinds which may be offered in sacrifice; 
they are, rice, barley, Masha, wheat, millet, and sesamum; Priyangu is the 
seventh, and kulattha, pulse, the eighth: the others are, Syamaka, a sort of panic; 
Nivara, uncultivated rice; Jarttila, wild sesamum; Gaveduka (coix); Markata, 
wild panic; and (a plant called) the seed or barley of the Bambu (Venu-yava). 
These, cultivated or wild, are the fourteen grains that were produced for 
purposes of offering in sacrifice; and sacrifice (the cause of rain) is their origin 
also: they again, with sacrifice, are the great cause of the perpetuation of the 
human race, as those understand who can discriminate cause and effect. Thence 
sacrifices were offered daily; the performance of which, oh best of Munis, is of 
essential service to mankind, and expiates the offences of those by whom they 
are observed. Those, however, in whose hearts the dross of sin derived from 
Time (Kala) was still more developed, assented not to sacrifices, but reviled both 
them and all that resulted from them, the gods, and the followers of the Vedas. 
Those abusers of the Vedas, of evil disposition and conduct, and seceders from 
the path of enjoined duties, were plunged in wickedness. 

The means of subsistence having been provided for the beings he had created, 
Brahma prescribed laws suited to their station and faculties, the duties of the 
several castes and orders, and the regions of those of the different castes who 
were observant of their duties. The heaven of the Pitris is the region of devout 
Brahmans. The sphere of Indra, of Kshetriyas who fly not from the field. The 
region of the winds is assigned to the Vaisyas who are diligent in their 
occupations and submissive. Sudras are elevated to the sphere of the 
Gandharbas. Those Brahmans who lead religious lives go to the world of the 
eighty-eight thousand saints: and that of the seven Rishis is the seat of pious 



anchorets and hermits. The world of ancestors is that of respectable 
householders: and the region of Brahma is the asylum of religious mendicants. 
The imperishable region of the Yogis is the highest seat of Vishnu, where they 
perpetually meditate upon the supreme being, with minds intent on him alone: 
the sphere where they reside, the gods themselves cannot behold. The sun, the 
moon, the planets, shall repeatedly be, and cease to be; but those who internally 
repeat the mystic adoration of the divinity, shall never know decay. For those 
who neglect their duties, who revile the Vedas, and obstruct religious rites, the 
places assigned after death are the terrific regions of darkness, of deep gloom, of 
fear, and of great terror; the fearful hell of sharp swords, the hell of scourges and 
of a waveless sea. 




Footnotes 

01. The creation of mankind here described is rather out of its place, as it 
precedes the birth of the Prajapatis, or their progenitors: but this want of 
method is common to the Puranas, and is evidence of their being 
compilations from various sources. 

02. This original of the four castes is given in Manu, and in most of the 
Puranas. We shall see, however, that the distinctions are subsequently 
ascribed to voluntary election, to accident, or to positive institutions. 

03. According to Manu, oblations ascend to and nourish the sun; whence the 
rain falls upon earth, and causes the growth of corn: burnt-offerings are 
therefore the final causes of the support of mankind. 

04. This description of a pure race of beings is not of general occurrence in 
the Puranas. It seems here to be abridged from a much more detailed 
account in the Brahmanda, Vayu, and Markandeya Puranas. In those 
works Brahma is said to create, in the beginning of the Kalpa, a thousand 
pairs of each of the four classes of mankind, who enjoy perfect happiness 
during the Krita age, and only gradually become subject to infirmities as 
the Treta or second age advances. 

05. These eight perfections, or Siddhis, are not the supernatural faculties 
obtained by the performance of the Yoga. They are described, the 
commentator says, in the Skanda and other works; and from them he 


extracts their description: 1. Rasollasa, the spontaneous or prompt 
evolution of the juices of the body, independently of nutriment from 
without: 2. Tripti, mental satisfaction, or freedom from sensual desire: 3. 
Samya, sameness of degree: 4. Tulyata, similarity of life, form, and 
feature: 5. Visoka, exemption alike from infirmity or grief: 6. 
Consummation of penance and meditation, by attainment of true 
knowledge: 7. The power of going every where at will: 8. The faculty of 
reposing at any time or in any place. These attributes are alluded to, 
though obscurely, in the Vayu, and are partly specified in the 
Markandeya Purana. 

06. In the other three Puranas, in which this legend has been found, the 
different kinds of inhabited places are specified and introduced by a 
series of land measures. Thus the Markandeya states, that 10 Paramanus 
= 1 Parasukshma; 10 Parasukshmas = 1 Trasarenu; 10 Trasarerius = 1 
particle of dust, or Mahirajas; 10 Mahirajasas = 1 Balagra, 'hair's point;' 
10 Balagras = 1 Likhya; 10 Likhyas= 1 Yuka; to Yukas = 1 heart of 
barley (Yavodara); 10 Yavodaras = 1 grain of barley of middle size; 10 
barley grains = 1 finger, or inch; 6 fingers = a Pada, or foot (the breadth 
of it); 2 Padas = 1 Vitasti, or span; 2 spans = 1 Hasta, or cubit; 4 Hastas = 
a Dhanu, a Danda, or staff, or 2 Narikas; 2000 Dhanus = a Gavyuti; 4 
Gavyutis = a Yojana. The measurement of the Brahmanda is less detailed. 
A span from the thumb to the first finger is a Pradesa; to the middle 
finger, a Nala; to the third finger, a Gokerna; and to the little finger, a 
Vitasti, which is equal to twelve Angulas, or fingers; understanding 
thereby, according to the Vayu, a joint of the finger; according to other 
authorities, it is the breadth of the thumb at the tip. (A. R. 5. 104.) The 
Vayu, giving similar measurements upon the authority of Manu, although 
such a statement does not occur in the Manu Sanhita, adds, that 21 
fingers= 1 Ratni; 24 fingers = 1 Hasta, or cubit; 2 Ratnis = 1 Kishku; 4 
Hastas = 1 Dhanu; 2000 Dhanus = 1 Gavyuti; and 8000 Dhanus = 1 
Yojana. Durgas, or strong holds, are of four kinds; three of which are 
natural, from, their situation in mountains, amidst water, or in other 
inaccessible spots; the fourth is the artificial defences of a village 
(Grama), a hamlet (Khetaka), or a city (Pura or Nagara), which are 
severally half the size of the next in the series. The best kind of city is 
one which is about a mile long by half a mile broad, built in the form of a 
parallelogram, facing the northeast, and surrounded by a high wall and 


ditch. A hamlet should be a Yojana distant from a city: a village half a 
Yojana from a hamlet. The roads leading to the cardinal points from a 
city should be twenty Dhanus (above too feet) broad: a village road 
should be the same: a boundary road ten Dhanus: a royal or principal 
road or street should be ten Dhanus (above fifty feet) broad: a cross or 
branch road should be four Dhanus. Lanes and paths amongst the houses 
are two Dhanus in breadth: footpaths four cubits: the entrance of a house 
three cubits: the private entrances and paths about the mansion of still 
narrower dimensions. Such were the measurements adopted by the first 
builders of cities, according to the Puranas specified. 

07. These are enumerated in the text, as well as in the Vayu and Markandeya 
P., and are, Udara, a sort of grain with long stalks (perhaps a holcus); 
Kodrava (Paspalum kora); Chinaka, a sort of panic (P. miliaceum); 
Masha, kidney bean (Phaseolus radiatus); Mudga (Phaseolus mungo); 
Masura, lentil (Ervum hirsutum); Nishpava, a sort of pulse; Kulattha 
(Dolithosbiflorus); Arhaki (Cytisus Cajan); Chanaka, chick pea (Cicer 
arietinum); and Sana (Crotolaria). 

08. This allusion to the sects hostile to the Vedas, Buddhists or Jains, does 
not occur in the parallel passages of the Vayu and Markandeya Puranas. 

09. The Vayu goes farther than this, and states that the castes were now first 
divided according to their occupations; having, indeed, previously stated 
that there was no such distinction in the Krita age: 'Brahma now 
appointed those who were robust and violent to be Kshetriyas, to protect 
the rest; those who were pure and pious he made Brahmans; those who 
were of less power, but industrious, and addicted to cultivate the ground, 
he made Vaisyas; whilst the feeble and poor of spirit were constituted 
Sudras: and he assigned them their several occupations, to prevent that 
interference with one another which had occurred as long as they 
recognised no duties peculiar to castes. 

10. These worlds, some of which will be more particularly described in a 
different section, are the seven Lokas or spheres above the earth: 1. 
Prajapatya or Pitri loka: 2. Indra loka or Swerga: 3. Marut loka or Diva 
loka, heaven: 4. Gandharba loka, the region of celestial spirits; also 
called Maharloka: 5. Janaloka, or the sphere of saints; some copies read 
eighteen thousand; others, as in the text, which is also the reading of the 
Padma Puraria: 6. Tapaloka, the world of the seven sages: and 7. Brahma 
loka or Satya loka, the world of infinite wisdom and truth. The eighth, or 


high world of Vishnu, is a sectarial addition, which in the Bhagavata is 
called Vaikuntha, and in the Brahma Vaivartta, Goloka; both apparently, 
and most certainly the last, modern inventions. 

11. The divisions of Naraka, or hell, here named, are again more particularly 
enumerated, b. II. c. 6. 




07. Chapter 


Creation continued. Production of the mind-born sons of Brahma; of the 
Prajapatis; of Sanandana and others; of Rudra and the eleven Rudras; of the 
Manu Swayambhuva, and his wife Satarupa; of their children. The daughters of 
Daksha, and their marriage to Dharma and others. The progeny of Disarms and 
Adharma. The perpetual succession of worlds, and different modes of mundane 
dissolution. 

PARASARA.—From Brahma, continuing to meditate, were born mind- 
engendered progeny, with forms and faculties derived from his corporeal nature; 
embodied spirits, produced from the person of that all-wise deity. All these 
beings, front the gods to inanimate things, appeared as I have related to you, 
being the abode of the three qualities: but as they did not multiply themselves, 
Brahma created other mind-born sons, like himself; namely, Bhrigu, Pulastya, 
Pulaha, Kratu, Angiras, Marichi, Daksha, Atri, and Vasishtha: these are the nine 
Brahmas (or Brahma rishis) celebrated in the Puranas. Sanandana and the other 
sons of Brahma were previously created by him, but they were without desire or 
passion, inspired with holy wisdom, estranged from the universe, and undesirous 
of progeny. This when Brahma perceived, he was filled with wrath capable of 
consuming the three worlds, the flame of which invested, like a garland, heaven, 
earth, and hell. Then from his forehead, darkened with angry frowns, sprang 
Rudra, radiant as the noon-tide sun, fierce, and of vast bulk, and of a figure 
which was half male, half female. Separate yourself, Brahma said to him; and 
having so spoken, disappeared. Obedient to which command, Rudra became 
twofold, disjoining his male and female natures. His male being he again divided 
into eleven persons, of whom some were agreeable, some hideous, some fierce, 
some mild; and he multiplied his female nature manifold, of complexions black 
or whiteThen Brahma. 

Then Brahma created himself the Manu Swayambhuva, born of, and identical 
with, his original self, for the protection of created beings; and the female 
portion of himself he constituted Satarupa, whom austerity purified from the sin 
(of forbidden nuptials), and whom the divine Manu Swayambhuva took to wife. 
From these two were born two sons, Priyavrata and Uttanapada and two 


daughters, named Prasuti and Akuti, graced with loveliness and exalted merit. 
Prasiiti he gave to Daksha, after giving Akuti to the patriarch Ruchi, who 
espoused her. Akuti bore to Ruchi twins, Yajna and Dakshina, who afterwards 
became husband and wife, and had twelve sons, the deities called Yamas, in the 
Manwantara of Swayambhuva. 

The patriarch Daksha had by Prasuti twenty-four daughters hear from me their 
names: Sraddha (faith), Lakshmi (prosperity), Dhriti (steadiness), Tushti 

r 

(resignation), Pushti (thriving), Medha (intelligence), Kriya (action, devotion), 
Buddhi (intellect), Lajja (modesty), Vapu (body), Santi (expiation), Siddhi 
(perfection), Kirtti (fame): these thirteen daughters of Daksha, Dharma 
(righteousness) took to wife. The other eleven bright-eyed and younger 
daughters of the patriarch were, Khyati (celebrity), Sati (truth), Sambhuti 
(fitness), Smriti (memory), Priti (affection), Kshama (patience), Sannati 
(humility), Anasiiya (charity), Urjja (energy), with Swaha (offering), and 
Swadha (oblation). These maidens were respectively wedded to the Munis, 

r 

Bhrigu, Bhava, Marichi, Angiras, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, Atri, and Vasishtha; to 
Fire (Vahni), and to the Pitris (progenitors). 

The progeny of Dharma by the daughters of Daksha were as follows: by Sraddha 
he had Kama (desire); by Lakshmi, Darpa (pride); by Dhriti, Niyama (precept); 
by Tushti, Santosha (content); by Pushti, Lobha (cupidity); by Medha, Sruta 
(sacred tradition); by Kriya, Danda, Naya, and Vinaya (correction, polity, and 
pmdence); by Buddhi, Bodha (understanding); by Lajja, Vinaya (good 
behaviour); by Vapu, Vyavasaya (perseverance). Santi gave birth to Kshema 
(prosperity); Siddhi to Sukha (enjoyment); and Kirtti to Yasas (reputation). 
These were the sons of Dharma; one of whom, Kama, had Hersha (joy) by his 
wife Nandi (delight). 

The wife of Adharma (vice) was Hinsa (violence), on whom he begot a son 
Anrita (falsehood), and a daughter Nikriti (immorality): they intermarried, and 
had two sons, Bhaya (fear) and Naraka (hell); and twins to them, two daughters, 
Maya (deceit) and Vedana (torture), who became their wives. The son of Bhaya 
and Maya was the destroyer of living creatures, or Mrityu (death); and Dukha 
(pain) was the offspring of Naraka and Vedana. The children of Mrityu were 
Vyadhi (disease), Jara (decay), Soka (sorrow), Trishria (greediness), and Krodha 
(wrath). These are all called the inflictors of misery, and are characterised as the 



progeny of Vice (Adharma). They are all without wives, without posterity, 
without the faculty to procreate; they are the terrific forms of Vishnu, and 
perpetually operate as causes of the destruction of this world. On the contrary, 
Daksha and the other Rishis, the elders of mankind, tend perpetually to influence 
its renovation: whilst the Manus and their sons, the heroes endowed with mighty 
power, and treading in the path of truth, as constantly contribute to its 
preservation. 

MAITREYA.—Tell me, Brahman, what is the essential nature of these 
revolutions, perpetual preservation, perpetual creation, and perpetual destruction. 

PARASARA.—Madhusudana, whose essence is incomprehensible, in the forms 
of these (patriarchs and Manus), is the author of the uninterrupted vicissitudes of 
creation, preservation, and destruction. The dissolution of all things is of four 
kinds; Naimittika, 'occasional;' Prakritika, 'elemental;' Atyantika, 'absolute;' 
Nitya, 'perpetual The first, also termed the Brahma dissolution, occurs when the 
sovereign of the world reclines in sleep. In the second, the mundane egg resolves 
into the primary element, from whence it was derived. Absolute non-existence of 
the world is the absorption of the sage, through knowledge, into supreme spirit. 
Perpetual destruction is the constant disappearance, day and night, of all that are 
born. The productions of Prakriti form the creation that is termed the elemental 
(Prakrita). That which ensues after a (minor) dissolution is called ephemeral 
creation: and the daily generation of living things is termed, by those who are 
versed in the Purarias, constant creation. In this manner the mighty Vishnu, 
whose essence is the elements, abides in all bodies, and brings about production, 
existence, and dissolution. The faculties of Vishnu to create, to preserve, and to 
destroy, operate successively, Maitreya, in all corporeal beings and at all 
seasons; and he who frees himself from the influence of these three faculties, 
which are essentially composed of the three qualities (goodness, foulness, and 
darkness), goes to the supreme sphere, from whence he never again returns. 


Footnotes 


01. It is not clear which of the previous narratives is here referred to, but it 


seems most probable that the account in. is intended. 

02. Considerable variety prevails in this list of Prajapatis, Brahmaputras, 
Brahmanas, or Brahmarshis; but the variations are of the nature of 
additions made to an apparently original enumeration of but seven, 
whose names generally recur. Thus in the Mahabharata, Moksha Dharma, 
we have in one place, Marichi, Atri, Angiras, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, 

r 

and Vasishtha, 'the seven highminded sons of the self-born Brahma.' In 
another place of the same, however, we have Daksha substituted for 

r 

Vasishtha: 'Brahma then created mind-begotten sons, of whom Daksha 
was the seventh, with Marichi,' &c. These seven sons of Brahma are also 
identified with the seven Rishis as in the Vayu; although, with palpable 
inconsistency, eight are immediately enumerated, or, Bhrigu, Marichi, 
Atri, Angiras, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, and Vasishtha. The Uttara Khanda 
of the Padma P. substitutes Kardama for Vasishtha. The Bhagavata 
includes Daksha, enumerating nine. The Matsya agrees with Manu in 
adding Narada to the list of our text. The Kurma P. adds Dharma and 
Sankalpa. The Linga, Brahmarida, and Vayu P. also add them, and extend 
the list to Adharma and Ruchi. The Hari Vansa in one place inserts 
Gautama, and in another Manu. Altogether therefore we have seventeen, 
instead of seven. But the accounts given of the origin of several of these, 
shew that they were not originally included amongst the Manasa putras, 
or sons of Brahma's mind; for even Daksha, who finds a place in all the 
lists except one of those given in the Mahabharata, is uniformly said to 
have sprung from Brahma's thumb: and the same patriarch, as well as 
Dharma, is included in some accounts, as in the Bhagavata and Matsya 
P., amongst a different series of Brahma's progeny, or virtues and vices; 
or, Daksha (dexterity), Dharma (virtue), Kama (desire), Krodha 
(passion), Lobha (covetousness), Moha (infatuation), Mada (insanity), 
Pramoda (pleasure), Mrityu (death), and Angaja (lust). These are 
severally derived from different parts of Brahma's body: and the 
Bhagavata, adding Kardama (soil or sin) to this enumeration, makes him 
spring from Brahma's shadow. The simple statement, that the first 
Prajapatis sprang from the mind or will of Brahma, has not contented the 
depraved taste of the mystics, and in some of the Purarias, as the 
Bhagavata, Linga, and Vayu, they also are derived from the body of their 
progenitor; or, Bhrigu from his skin, Marichi from his mind, Atri from 
his eyes, Angiras from his mouth, Pulastya from his ear, Pulaha from his 


r 

navel, Kratu from his hand, Vasishtha from his breath, Daksha from his 
thumb, and Narada from his hip. They do not exactly agree, however, in 
the places whence these beings proceed; as for instance, according to the 
Linga, Marichi springs from Brahma's eyes, not Atri, who there proceeds, 
instead of Pulastya, from his ears. The Vayu has also another account of 
their origin, and states them to have sprung from the fires of a sacrifice 
offered by Brahma; an allegorical mode of expressing their probable 
original, considering them to be in some degree real persons, from the 
Brahmanical ritual, of which they were the first institutors and observers. 
The Vayu P. also states, that besides the seven primitive Rishis, the 
Prajapatis are numerous, and specifies Kardama, Kasyapa, Sesha, 
Vikranta, Susravas, Bahuputra, Kumara, Vivaswat, Suchisravas, 
Prachetasa (Daksha), Arishtanemi, Bahula. These and many others were 
Prajapatis. In the beginning of the Mahabharata (A. P.) we have again a 
different origin, and first Daksha, the son of Prachetas, it is said, had 
seven sons, after whom the twenty-one Prajapatis were born, or 
appeared. According to the commentator, the seven sons of Daksha were 
the allegorical persons Krodha, Tamas, Dama, Vikrita, Angiras, Kardama, 
and Aswa; and the twenty-one Prajapatis, the seven usually specified 
Marichi and the rest, and the fourteen Manus. This looks like a blending 
of the earlier and later notions. 

03. Besides this general notice of the origin of Rudra and his separate forms, 
we have in the next chapter an entirely different set of beings so 
denominated; and the eleven alluded to in the text are also more 
particularly enumerated in a subsequent chapter. The origin of Rudra, as 
one of the agents in creation, is described in most of the Puranas. The 
Mahabharata, indeed, refers his origin to Vishnu, representing him as the 
personification of his anger, whilst Brahma is that of his kindness. The 
Kurma P. makes him proceed from Brahma's mouth, whilst engaged in 
meditating on creation. The Varaha P. makes this appearance of Rudra the 
consequence of a promise made by Siva to Brahma, that he would 
become his son. In the parallel passages in other Puranas the progeny of 
the Rudra created by Brahma is not confined to the eleven, but 
comprehends infinite numbers of beings in person and equipments like 
their parent; until Brahma, alarmed at their fierceness, numbers, and 
immortality, desires his son Rudra, or, as the Matsya calls him, 
Vamadeva, to form creatures of a different and mortal nature. Rudra 


refusing to do this, desists; whence his name Sthanu, from Stha, 'to stay.' 
Linga, Vayu P. &c. 

04. According to the Vayu, the female became first twofold, or one half 
white, and the other black; and each of these, again, becomes manifold, 
being the various energies, or Saktis, of Mahadeva, as stated by the 
Kurma, after the words ### which are those of our text: ###. The Linga 
and Vayu specify many of their names. Those of the white complexion, 
or mild nature, include Lakshmi, Saraswati, Gauri, Uma, &c. Those of 
the dark hue, and fierce disposition, Durga, Kali, Chandi, Maharatri, and 
others. 

05. Brahma, after detaching from himself the property of anger, in the form 
of Rudra, converted himself into two persons, the first male, or the Manu 
Swayambhuva, and the first woman, or Satarupa: so in the Vedas; 'So 
himself was indeed (his) son.' The commencement of production through 
sexual agency is here described with sufficient distinctness, but the 
subject has been rendered obscure by a more complicated succession of 
agents, and especially by the introduction of a person of a mythic or 
mystical character, Viraj. The notion is thus expressed in Manu: "Having 
divided his own substance, the mighty power Brahma became half male 
and half female; and from that female he produced Viraj. Know me to be 
that person whom the male Viraj produced by himself." I. 32, 33. We 
have therefore a series of Brahma, Viraj, and Manu, instead of Brahma 
and Manu only: also the generation of progeny by Brahma, begotten on 

Satarupa, instead of her being, as in our text, the wife of Manu. The idea 

// 

seems to have originated with the Vedas, as Kulluka Bhatta quotes a text; 
'Then (or thence) Virat was born.' The procreation of progeny by Brahma, 
however, is at variance with the whole system, which almost invariably 
refers his creation to the operation of his will: and the expression in 
Manu, 'he created Viraj in her,' does not necessarily imply sexual 
intercourse. Viraj also creates, not begets, Manu. And in neither instance 
does the name of Satarupa occur. The commentator on Manu, however, 
understands the expression asrijat to imply the procreation of Viraj; and 
the same interpretation is given by the Matsya Purana, in which the 
incestuous passion of Brahma for Satarupa, his daughter in one sense, his 
sister in another, is described; and by her he begets Viraj, who there is 
called, not the progenitor of Manu, but Manu himself. This therefore 
agrees with our text, as far as it makes Manu the son of Brahma, though 



not as to the nature of the connexion. The reading of the Agni and Padma 
P. is that of the Vishnu; and the Bhagavata agrees with it in one place, 
stating distinctly that the male half of Brahma, was Manu, the other half, 
Satarupa: ### Bhagav. III. 12. 35: and although the production of Viraj is 
elsewhere described, it is neither as the son of Brahma, nor the father of 
Manu. The original and simple idea, therefore, appears to be, the identity 
of Manu with the male half of Brahma, and his being thence regarded as 
his son. The Kurma P. gives the same account as Manu, and in the same 
words. The Linga P. and Vayu P. describe the origin of Viraj and Satarupa 
from Brahma; and they intimate the union of Satarupa with Purusha or 
Viraj, the male portion of Brahma, in the first instance; and in the second, 
with Manu, who is termed Vairaja, or the son of Viraj. The Brahma P., the 
words of which are repeated in the Hari Vansa, introduces a new element 
of perplexity in a new name, that of Apava. According to the 
commentator, this is a name of the Prajapati Vasishtha. As, however, he 
performs the office of Brahma, he should be regarded as that divinity: but 
this is not exactly the case, although it has been so rendered by the 
French translator. Apava becomes twofold, and in the capacity of his 
male half begets offspring by the female. Again, it is said Vishnu created 
Viraj, and Viraj created the male, which is Vairaja or Manu; who was 
thus the second interval (Antaram), or stage, in creation. That is, 
according to the commentator, the first stage was the creation of Apava, 

r 

or Vasishtha, or Viraj, by Vishnu, through the agency of Hiranyagarbha 
or Brahma; and the next was that of the creation of Manu by Viraj. 
Satarupa appears as first the bride of Apava, and then as the wife of 
Manu. This account therefore, although obscurely expressed, appears to 
be essentially the same with that of Manu; and we have Brahma, Viraj, 
Manu, instead of Brahma and Manu. It seems probable that this 
difference, and the part assigned to Viraj, has originated in some measure 
from confounding Brahma with the male half of his individuality, and 
considering as two beings that which was but one. If the Purusha or Viraj 
be distinct from Brahma, what becomes of Brahma? The entire whole 
and its two halves cannot coexist; although some of the Pauranics and the 
author of Manu seem to have imagined its possibility, by making Viraj 
the son of Brahma. The perplexity, however, is still more ascribable to 
the personification of that which was only an allegory. The division of 
Brahma into two halves designates, as is very evident from the passage in 



the Vedas given by Mr. Colebrooke, (As. R. VIII. 425,) the distinction of 
corporeal substance into two sexes; Viraj being all male animals, 
Satarupa all female animals. So the commentator on the Hari Vansa 
explains the former to denote the horse, the bull, &c.; and the latter, the 
mare, the cow, and the like. In the Bhagavata the term Viraj implies, 
Body, collectively, as the commentator observes; 'As the sun illuminates 
his own inner sphere, as well as the exterior regions, so soul, shining in 
body (Viraja), irradiates all without and within.' All therefore that the 
birth of Viraj was intended to express, was the creation of living body, of 
creatures of both sexes: and as in consequence man was produced, he 
might be said to be the son of Viraj, or bodily existence. Again, Satarupa, 
the bride of Brahma, or of Viraj, or of Manu, is nothing more than beings 
of varied or manifold forms, from Sata, 'a hundred,' and 'form;' explained 
by the annotator on the Hari Vansa by Anantarupa, 'of infinite,' and 
Vividharupa, 'of diversified shape;' being, as he states, the same as Maya, 
'illusion,' or the power of multiform metamorphosis. The Matsya R has a 
little allegory of its own, on the subject of Brahma's intercourse with 
Satarupa; for it explains the former to mean the Vedas, and the latter the 
Savitri, or holy prayer, which is their chief text; and in their cohabitation 
there is therefore no evil. 

06. The Brahma R has a different order, and makes Vira the son of the first 
pair, who has Uttanapada, &c. by Kamya. The commentator on the Hari 
Vansa quotes the Vayu for a confirmation of this account; but the passage 
there is, 'Satarupa bore to the male Vairaja (Manu) two Viras,' i. e. heroes 
or heroic sons, Uttanpada and Priyavrata. It looks as if the compiler of 
the Brahma P. had made some very unaccountable blunder, and invented 
upon it a new couple, Vira and Kamya: no such person as the former 
occurs in any other Purana, nor does Kamya, as his wife. 

07. The Bhagavata adds a third daughter, Devahuti; for the purpose 
apparently of introducing a long legend of the Rishi Kardama, to whom 
she is married, and of their son Kapila: a legend not met with any where 
else. 

08. Ruchi is reckoned amongst the Prajapatis by the Linga and Vayu 
Pur anas. 

09. These descendants of Swayambhuva are all evidently allegorical: thus 
Yajna is 'sacrifice,' and Dakshina 'donation' to Brahmans. 

10. The Bhagavata (b. IV. c. 1) says the Tushitas, but they are the divinities 


of the second, not of the first Manwantara, as appears also in another part 
of the same, where the Yamas are likewise referred to the Swayambhuva 
Manwantara. 

11. These twenty-four daughters are of much less universal occurrence in the 
Puranas than the more extensive series of fifty or sixty, which is 
subsequently described, and which appears to be the more ancient 
legend. 

12. The twenty-four daughters of Daksha are similarly named and disposed 
of in most of the Puranas which notice them. The Bhagavata, having 
introduced a third daughter, of Swayambhuva, has a rather different 
enumeration, in order to assign some of them, the wives of the Prajapatis, 
to Kardama and Devahuti. Daksha had therefore, it is there said (b. IV. c. 
1), sixteen daughters, thirteen of whom were married to Dharma, named 
Sraddha, Maitri (friendship), Daya (clemency), Santi Tushti, Pushti, 
Kriya, Unnati (elevation), Buddhi, Medha, Titiksha (patience), Hri 
(modesty), Murtti (form); and three, Sati, Swaha, and Swadha, married, 
as in our text. Some of the daughters of Devahuti repeat these 
appellations, but that is of slight consideration. They are, Kala (a 
moment), married to Marichi; Anasuya to Atri; Sraddha to Angiras; 
Havirbhu (oblation-born) to Pulastya; Gati (movement) to Pulaha; Kriya 

r 

to Kratu; Khyati to Bhrigu; Arundhati to Vasishtha; and Santi to 
Atharvan. In all these instances the persons are manifestly allegorical, 
being personifications of intelligences and virtues and religious rites, and 
being therefore appropriately wedded to the probable authors of the 
Hindu code of religion and morals, or to the equally allegorical 
representation of that code, Dharma, moral and religious duty. 

13. The same remark applies here. The Puranas that give these details 
generally concur with our text, but the Bhagavata specifies the progeny 
of Dharma in a somewhat different manner; or, following the order 
observed in the list of Dharma's wives, their children are, Rita (tmth), 
Prasada (favour), Abhaya (fearlessness), Sukha, Muda (pleasure), Smaya 
(wonder), Yoga (devotion), Darpa, Artha (meaning), Smriti (memory), 
Kshema, Prasraya (affection), and the two saints Nara and Narayana, the 
sons of Dharma by Murtti. We have occasional varieties of nomenclature 
in other authorities; as, instead of Sruta, Sama; Kurma P.: instead of 
Dandanaya, Samaya; and instead of Bodha, Apramada; Linga P.: and 
Siddha in place of Sukha; Kurma P. 


14. The text rather abruptly introduces Adharma and his family. He is said by 
the commentator to be the son of Brahma, and the Linga P. enumerates 
him among the Prajapatis, as well as Dharma. According to the 
Bhagavata, he is the husband of Mrisha (falsehood), and the father of 
Dambha (hypocrisy) and Maya (deceit), who were adopted by Nirritti. 
The series of their descendants is also somewhat varied from our text; 
being in each descent, however, twins which intermarry, or Lobha 
(covetousness) and Nikriti, who produce Krodha (wrath) and Hinsa: their 
children are, Kali (wickedness) and Durukti (evil speech): their progeny 
are, Mrityu and Bhi (fear); whose offspring are, Niraya (hell) and Yatana 
(torment). 

15. The three first of these are more particularly described in the last book: 
the last, the Nitya, or constant, is differently described by Col. Vans 
Kennedy (Ancient and Hindu Mythology). "In the 7th chapter," he 
observes, "of the Vishnu Puraria four kinds of Pralaya are described. The 
Naimittika takes place when Brahma slumbers: the Prakritika when this 
universe returns to its original nature: Atyantika proceeds from divine 
knowledge: and Nitya is the extinction of life, like the extinction of a 
lamp, in sleep at night." For this last characteristic, however, our text 
furnishes no warrant; nor can it be explained to signify, that the Nitya 
Pralaya means no more than "a man's falling into a sound sleep at night." 
All the copies consulted on the present occasion concur in reading ### as 
rendered above. The commentator supplies the illustration, 'like the flame 
of a lamp;' but he also writes, 'That which is the destruction of all that are 
born, night and day, is the Nitya, or constant.' Again, in a verse presently 
following we have the Nitya Sarga, 'constant or perpetual creation,' as 
opposed to constant dissolution: 'That in which, oh excellent sages, 
beings are daily born, is termed constant creation, by those learned in the 
Purarias.' The commentator explains this, 'The constant flow or 
succession of the creation of ourselves and other creatures is the Nitya or 
constant creation: this is the meaning of the text.' It is obvious, therefore, 
that the alternation intended is that of life and death, not of waking and 
sleep. 





08. Chapter 


Origin of Rudra: his becoming eight Rudras: their wives and children. The 
posterity of Bhrigu. Account of Sri in conjunction with Vishnu. Sacrifice of 
Daksha. 

PARASARA.—I have described to you, oh great Muni, the creation of Brahma, 
in which the quality of darkness prevailed. I will now explain to you the creation 
of Rudra. 

In the beginning of the Kalpa, as Brahma purposed to create a son, who should 
be like himself, a youth of a purple complexion appeared, crying with a low cry, 
and running about. Brahma, when he beheld him thus afflicted, said to him, 
"Why dost thou weep?" "Give me a name," replied the boy. "Rudra be thy 
name," rejoined the great father of all creatures: "be composed; desist from 
tears." But, thus addressed, the boy still wept seven times, and Brahma therefore 
gave to him seven other denominations; and to these eight persons regions and 
wives and posterity belong. The eight manifestations, then, are named Rudra, 
Bhava, Sarva, Isana, Pasupati, Bhima, Ugra, and Mahadeva, which were given to 
them by their great progenitor. He also assigned to them their respective stations, 
the sun, water, earth, air, fire, ether, the ministrant Brahman, and the moon; for 
these are their several forms. The wives of the sun and the other manifestations, 
termed Rudra and the rest, were respectively, Suverchala, Usha, Vikesi, Siva, 
Swaha, Disa, Diksha, and Rohini. Now hear an account of their progeny, by 
whose successive generations this world has been peopled. Their sons, then, 
were severally, Sanaischara (Saturn), Sukra (Venus), the fiery-bodied Mars, 
Manojava (Hanuman), Skanda, Swarga, Santana, and Budha (Mercury). 

It was the Rudra of this description that married Sati, who abandoned her 
corporeal existence in consequence of the displeasure of Daksha. She afterwards 
was the daughter of Himavan (the snowy mountains) by Mena; and in that 
character, as the only Uma, the mighty Bhava again married her. The divinities 
Dhata and Vidhata were born to Bhrigu by Khyati, as was a daughter, Sri, the 
wife of Narayaria, the god of gods. 


MAITREYA.—It is commonly said that the goddess Sri was born from the sea of 
milk, when it was churned for ambrosia; how then can you say that she was the 
daughter of Bhrigu by Khyati. 

PARASARA.—Sri, the bride of Vishnu, the mother of the world, is eternal, 
imperishable; in like manner as he is all-pervading, so also is she, oh best of 
Brahmans, omnipresent. Vishnu is meaning; she is speech. Hari is polity (Naya); 
she is prudence (Niti). Vishnu is understanding; she is intellect. He is 
righteousness; she is devotion. He is the creator; she is creation. Sri is the earth; 
Hari the support of it. The deity is content; the eternal Lakshmi is resignation. 
He is desire; Sri is wish. He is sacrifice; she is sacrificial donation (Dakshina). 
The goddess is the invocation which attends the oblation; Janarddana is the 
oblation. Lakshmi is the chamber where the females are present (at a religious 
ceremony); Madhusudana the apartment of the males of the family. Lakshmi is 
the altar; Hari the stake (to which the victim is bound). Sri is the fuel; Hari the 
holy grass (Kusa). He is the personified Sama veda; the goddess, lotus-throned, 
is the tone of its chanting. Lakshmi is the prayer of oblation (Swaha); Vasudeva, 
the lord of the world, is the sacrificial fire. Sauri (Vishnu) is Sankara (Siva); and 
Sri is the bride of Siva (Gauri). Kesava, oh Maitreya, is the sun; and his radiance 
is the lotus-seated goddess. Vishnu is the tribe of progenitors (Pitrigana); Padma. 
is their bride (Swadha), the eternal bestower of nutriment. Sri is the heavens; 
Vishnu, who is one with all things, is wide extended space. The lord of Sri is the 
moon; she is his unfading light. She is called the moving principle of the world; 
he, the wind which bloweth every where. Govinda is the ocean; Lakshmi its 
shore. Lakshmi is the consort of Indra (Indram); Madhusudana is Devendra. The 
holder of the discus (Vishnu) is Yama (the regent of Tartarus); the lotus-throned 
goddess is his dusky spouse (Dhumorna). Sri is wealth; Sridhara (Vishnu) is 
himself the god of riches (Kuvera). Lakshmi, illustrious Brahman, is Gauri; and 
Kesava, is the deity of ocean (Varuna). Sri is the host of heaven (Devasena); the 
deity of war, her lord, is Hari. The wielder of the mace is resistance; the power to 

r r 

oppose is Sri. Lakshmi is the Kashtha and the Kala; Hari the Nimesha and the 
Muhurtta. Lakshmi is the light; and Hari, who is all, and lord of all, the lamp. 
She, the mother of the world, is the creeping vine; and Vishnu the tree round 
which she clings. She is the night; the god who is armed with the mace and 
discus is the day. He, the bestower of blessings, is the bridegroom; the lotus- 
throned goddess is the bride. 



The god is one with all male--the goddess one with all female, rivers. The lotus¬ 
eyed deity is the standard; the goddess seated on a lotus the banner. Lakshmi is 
cupidity; Narayaria, the master of the world, is covetousness. Oh thou who 
knowest what righteousness is, Govinda is love; and Lakshmi, his gentle spouse, 
is pleasure. But why thus diffusely enumerate their presence: it is enough to say, 
in a word, that of gods, animals, and men, Hari is all that is called male; Lakshmi 
is all that is termed female: there is nothing else than they. 


Footnotes 

01. The creation of Rudra has been already adverted to, and that seems to be 
the primitive form of the legend. We have here another account, 
grounded apparently upon Saiva or Yogi mysticism. 

02. The appearance of Rudra as a Kumara, 'a boy,' is described as of repeated 
occurrence in the Linga and Vayu Puranas, as already noticed and these 
Kumaras are of different complexions in different Kalpas. In the 
Vaishriava Puranas, however, we have only one original form, to which 
the name of Nilalohita, the blue and red or purple complexioned is 
assigned. In the Kurma this youth comes from Brahma's mouth: in the 
Vayu, from his forehead. 

03. This is the Paurariic etymology: ### or rud, 'to weep,' and dru, 'to run' 
The grammarians derive the name from rud, 'to weep,' with ra affix. 

04. The Vayu details the application of each name severally. These eight 
Rudras are therefore but one, under as many appellations, and in as many 
types. The Padma, Markarideya, Kurma, Linga, and Vayu agree with our 
text in the nomenclature of the Rudras, and their types, their wives, and 
progeny. The types are those which are enumerated in the Nandi, or 
opening benedictory verse, of Sakuntala; and the passage of the Vishnu P. 
was found by Mons. Chezy on the envelope of his copy. He has justly 
corrected Sir Wm. Jones's version of the term ### 'the sacrifice is 
performed with solemnity;' as the word means, 'Brahmane officiant,' 'the 
Brahman who is qualified by initiation (Diksha) to conduct the rite.' 
These are considered as the bodies, or visible forms, of those 
modifications of Rudra which are variously named, and which, being 




praised in them, severally abstain from harming them: ### Vayu P. The 
Bhagavata, III. 12, has a different scheme, as usual; but it confounds the 
notion of the eleven Rudras, to whom the text subsequently adverts, with 
that of the eight here specified. These eleven it terms Manyu, Manu, 
Mahinasa, Mahan, Siva, Ritadhwaja, Ugraretas, Bhava, Kala, Vamadeva, 
and Dhritavrata: their wives are, Dhi, Dhriti, Rasaloma, Niyut, Sarpi, Ila, 
Ambika, Iravati, Swadha, Diksha, Rudrani: and their places are, the 
heart, senses, breath, ether, air, fire, water, earth, sun, moon, and tapas, or 
ascetic devotion. The same allegory or mystification characterises both 
accounts. 

05. See the story of Daksha's sacrifice at the end of the chapter. 

06. The story of Uma's birth and marriage occurs in the Siva P. and in the 
Kasi Khanda of the Skanda P.: it is noticed briefly, and with some 
variation from the Puranas, in the Ramayana, first book: it is also given 
in detail in the Kumara Sambhava of Kalidasa. 

07. The family of Bhrigu is more particularly described in the tenth chapter: 
it is here mentioned merely to introduce the story of the birth of the 
goddess of prosperity, Sri. 





Sacrifice Of Daksha (From the Vayu Purana) 


"There was formerly a peak of Mem, named Savitra, abounding with gems, 
radiant as the sun, and celebrated throughout the three worlds; of immense 
extent, and difficult of access, and an object of universal veneration. Upon that 
glorious eminence, rich with mineral treasures, as upon a splendid couch, the 
deity Siva reclined, accompanied by the daughter of the sovereign of mountains, 
and attended by the mighty Adityas, the powerful Vasus, and by the heavenly 
physicians, the sons of Aswini; by Kuvera, surrounded by his train of Guhyakas, 
the lord of the Yakshas, who dwells on Kailasa. There also was the great Muni 
Usanas: there, were Rishis of the first order, with Sanatkumara at their head; 
divine Rishis, preceded by Angiras; Viswavasu, with his bands of heavenly 
choristers; the sages Narada and Parvata; and innumerable troops of celestial 
nymphs. The breeze blew upon the mountain, bland, pure, and fragrant; and the 
trees were decorated with flowers, that blossomed in every season. The 
Vidyadharas and Siddhas, affluent in devotion, waited upon Mahadeva, the lord 
of living creatures; and many other beings, of various forms, did him homage. 
Rakshasas of terrific semblance, and Pisachas of great strength, of different 
shapes and features, armed with various weapons, and blazing like fire, were 
delighted to be present, as the followers of the god. There stood the royal Nandi, 
high in the favour of his lord, armed with a fiery trident, shining with inherent 
lustre; and there the best of rivers, Ganga, the assemblage of all holy waters, 
stood adoring the mighty deity. Thus worshipped by all the most excellent of 
sages and of gods, abode the omnipotent and all-glorious Mahadeva. 

"In former times, Daksha commenced a holy sacrifice on the side of Himavan, at 
the sacred spot Gangadwara, frequented by the Rishis. The gods, desirous of 
assisting at this solemn rite, came, with Indra at their head, to Mahadeva, and 
intimated their purpose; and having received his permission, departed in their 
splendid chariots to Gangadwara, as tradition reports. They found Daksha, the 
best of the devout, surrounded by the singers and nymphs of heaven, and by 
numerous sages, beneath the shade of clustering trees and climbing plants; and 
all of them, whether dwellers on earth, in air, or in the regions above the skies, 
approached the patriarch with outward gestures of respect. The Adityas, Vasus, 
Rudras, Maruts, all entitled to partake of the oblations, together with Jishriu, 


were present. The four classes of Pitris, Ushmapas, Somapas, Ajyapas, and 
Dhumapas, or those who feed upon the flame, the acid juice, the butter, or the 
smoke of offerings, the Aswins and the progenitors, came along with Brahma. 
Creatures of every class, born from the womb, the egg, from vapour, or 
vegetation, came upon their invocation; as did all the gods, with their brides, 
who in their resplendent vehicles blazed like so many fires. Beholding them thus 
assembled, the sage Dadhicha was filled with indignation, and observed, 'The 
man who worships what ought not to be worshipped, or pays not reverence 
where veneration is due, is guilty, most assuredly, of heinous sin.' Then 
addressing Daksha, he said to him, 'Why do you not offer homage to the god 
who is the lord of life (Pasubhartri)?' Daksha spake; 'I have already many Rudras 
present, armed with tridents, wearing braided hair, and existing in eleven forms: 
I recognise no other Mahadeva.' Dadhicha spake; 'The invocation that is not 
addressed to Isa, is, for all, but a solitary (and imperfect) summons. Inasmuch as 
I behold no other divinity who is superior to Sankara, this sacrifice of Daksha 
will not be completed.' Daksha spake; I offer, in a golden cup, this entire 
oblation, which has been consecrated by many prayers, as an offering ever due to 
the unequalled Vishnu, the sovereign lord of all.' 

"In the meanwhile, the virtuous daughter of the mountain king, observing the 
departure of the divinities, addressed her lord, the god of living beings, and said- 
-Uma spake—'Whither, oh lord, have the gods, preceded by Indra, this day 
departed? Tell me truly, oh thou who knowest all truth, for a great doubt 
perplexes me.' Maheswara spake; Illustrious goddess, the excellent patriarch 
Daksha celebrates the sacrifice of a horse, and thither the gods repair.' Devi 
spake; Why then, most mighty god, dost thou also not proceed to this solemnity? 
by what hinderance is thy progress thither impeded?' Maheswara spake; 'This is 
the contrivance, mighty queen, of all the gods, that in all sacrifices no portion 
should be assigned to me. In consequence of an arrangement formerly devised, 
the gods allow me, of right, no participation of sacrificial offerings.' Devi spake; 
'The lord god lives in all bodily forms, and his might is eminent through his 
superior faculties; he is unsurpassable, he is unapproachable, in splendour and 
glory and power. That such as he should be excluded from his share of oblations, 
fills me with deep sorrow, and a trembling, oh sinless, seizes upon my frame. 
Shall I now practise bounty, restraint, or penance, so that my lord, who is 
inconceivable, may obtain a share, a half or a third portion, of the sacrifice?' 



"Then the mighty and incomprehensible deity, being pleased, said to his bride, 
thus agitated; and speaking; 'Slender-waisted queen of the gods, thou knowest 
not the purport of what thou sayest; but I know it, oh thou with large eyes, for 
the holy declare all things by meditation. By thy perplexity this day are all the 
gods, with Mahendra and all the three worlds, utterly confounded. In my 
sacrifice, those who worship me, repeat my praises, and chant the Rathantara 
song of the Sanaa veda; my priests worship me in the sacrifice of true wisdom, 
where no officiating Brahman is needed; and in this they offer me my portion.' 
Devi spake; 'The lord is the root of all, and assuredly, in every assemblage of the 
female world, praises or hides himself at will.' Mahadeva spake; 'Queen of the 
gods, I praise not myself: approach, and behold whom I shall create for the 
purpose of claiming my share of the rite.' 

"Having thus spoken to his beloved spouse, the mighty Maheswara created from 
his mouth a being like the fire of fate; a divine being, with a thousand heads, a 
thousand eyes, a thousand feet; wielding a thousand clubs, a thousand shafts; 
holding the shell, the discus, the mace, and bearing a blazing bow and battle-axe; 
fierce and terrific, shining with dreadful splendour, and decorated with the 
crescent moon; clothed in a tiger's skin, dripping with blood; having a capacious 
stomach, and a vast mouth, armed with formidable tusks: his ears were erect, his 
lips were pendulous, his tongue was lightning; his hand brandished the 
thunderbolt; flames streamed from his hair; a necklace of pearls wound round his 
neck; a garland of flame descended on his breast: radiant with lustre, he looked 
like the final fire that consumes the world. Four tremendous tusks projected from 
a mouth which extended from ear to ear: he was of vast bulk, vast strength, a 
mighty male and lord, the destroyer of the universe, and like a large fig-tree in 
circumference; shining like a hundred moons at once; fierce as the fire of love; 
having four heads, sharp white teeth, and of mighty fierceness, vigour, activity, 
and courage; glowing with the blaze of a thousand fiery suns at the end of the 
world; like a thousand undimmed moons: in bulk like Himadri, Kailasa, or 
Meru, or Mandara, with all its gleaming herbs; bright as the sun of destruction at 
the end of ages; of irresistible prowess, and beautiful aspect; irascible, with 
lowering eyes, and a countenance burning like fire; clothed in the hide of the 
elephant and lion, and girt round with snakes; wearing a turban on his head, a 
moon on his brow; sometimes savage, sometimes mild; having a chaplet of 
many flowers on his head, anointed with various unguents, and adorned with 
different ornaments and many sorts of jewels; wearing a garland of heavenly 



Karnikara flowers, and rolling his eyes with rage. Sometimes he danced; 
sometimes he laughed aloud; sometimes he stood wrapt in meditation; 
sometimes he trampled upon the earth; sometimes he sang; sometimes he wept 
repeatedly: and he was endowed with the faculties of wisdom, dispassion, power, 
penance, truth, endurance, fortitude, dominion, and self-knowledge. 

"This being, then, knelt down upon the ground, and raising his hands 
respectfully to his head, said to Mahadeva, 'Sovereign of the gods, command 
what it is that I must do for thee.' To which Maheswara replied, Spoil the 
sacrifice of Daksha.' Then the mighty Virabhadra, having heard the pleasure of 
his lord, bowed down his head to the feet of Prajapati; and starting like a lion 
loosed from bonds, despoiled the sacrifice of Daksha, knowing that the had been 
created by the displeasure of Devi. She too in her wrath, as the fearful goddess 
Rudrakali, accompanied him, with all her train, to witness his deeds. Virabhadra 
the fierce, abiding in the region of ghosts, is the minister of the anger of Devi. 
And he then created, from the pores of his skin, powerful demigods, the mighty 
attendants upon Rudra, of equal valour and strength, who started by hundreds 
and thousands into existence. Then a loud and confused clamour filled all the 
expanse of ether, and inspired the denizens of heaven with dread. The mountains 
tottered, and earth shook; the winds roared, and the depths of the sea were 
disturbed; the fires lost their radiance, and the sun grew pale; the planets of the 
firmament shone not, neither did the stars give light; the Rishis ceased their 
hymns, and gods and demons were mute; and thick darkness eclipsed the 
chariots of the skies. 

"Then from the gloom emerged fearful and numerous forms, shouting the cry of 
battle; who instantly broke or overturned the sacrificial columns, trampled upon 
the altars, and danced amidst the oblations. Running wildly hither and thither, 
with the speed of wind, they tossed about the implements and vessels of 
sacrifice, which looked like stars precipitated from the heavens. The piles of 
food and beverage for the gods, which had been heaped up like mountains; the 
rivers of milk; the banks of curds and butter; the sands of honey and butter-milk 
and sugar; the mounds of condiments and spices of every flavour; the undulating 
knolls of flesh and other viands; the celestial liquors, pastes, and confections, 
which had been prepared; these the spirits of wrath devoured or defiled or 
scattered abroad. Then falling upon the host of the gods, these vast and resistless 
Rudras beat or terrified them, mocked and insulted the nymphs and goddesses, 



and quickly put an end to the rite, although defended by all the gods; being the 
ministers of Rudra's wrath, and similar to himself. Some then made a hideous 
clamour, whilst others fearfully shouted, when Yajna was decapitated. For the 
divine Yajna, the lord of sacrifice, then began to fly up to heaven, in the shape of 
a deer; and Virabhadra, of immeasurable spirit, apprehending his power, cut off 
his vast head, after he had mounted into the sky. Daksha the patriarch, his 
sacrifice being destroyed, overcome with terror, and utterly broken in spirit, fell 
then upon the ground, where his head was spurned by the feet of the cruel 
Virabhadra. The thirty scores of sacred divinities were all presently bound, with 
a band of fire, by their lion-like foe; and they all then addressed him, crying, 'Oh 
Rudra, have mercy upon thy servants: oh lord, dismiss thine anger.' Thus spake 
Brahma and the other gods, and the patriarch Daksha; and raising their hands, 
they said, 'Declare, mighty being, who thou art.' Virabhadra said, 'I am not a god, 
nor an Aditya; nor am I come hither for enjoyment, nor curious to behold the 
chiefs of the divinities: know that I am come to destroy the sacrifice of Daksha, 
and that I am called Virabhadra, the issue of the wrath of Rudra. Bhadrakali also, 
who has sprung from the anger of Devi, is sent here by the god of gods to 
destroy this rite. Take refuge, king of kings, with him who is the lord of Uma; for 
better is the anger of Rudra than the blessings of other gods.' 

"Having heard the words of Virabhadra, the righteous Daksha propitiated the 
mighty god, the holder of the trident, Maheswara. The hearth of sacrifice, 
deserted by the Brahmans, had been consumed; Yajna had been metamorphosed 
to an antelope; the fires of Rudra's wrath had been kindled; the attendants, 
wounded by the tridents of the servants of the god, were groaning with pain; the 
pieces of the uprooted sacrificial posts were scattered here and there; and the 
fragments of the meat-offerings were carried off by flights of hungry vultures, 
and herds of howling jackals. Suppressing his vital airs, and taking up a posture 
of meditation, the many-sighted victor of his foes, Daksha fixed his eyes every 
where upon his thoughts. Then the god of gods appeared from the altar, 
resplendent as a thousand suns, and smiled upon him, and said, 'Daksha, thy 
sacrifice has been destroyed through sacred knowledge: I am well pleased with 
thee:' and then he smiled again, and said, 'What shall I do for thee; declare, 
together with the preceptor of the gods.' 

"Then Daksha, frightened, alarmed, and agitated, his eyes suffused with tears, 
raised his hands reverentially to his brow, and said, 'If, lord, thou art pleased; if I 



have found favour in thy sight; if I am to be the object of thy benevolence; if 
thou wilt confer upon me a boon, this is the blessing I solicit, that all these 
provisions for the solemn sacrifice, which have been collected with much trouble 
and during a long time, and which have now been eaten, drunk, devoured, burnt, 
broken, scattered abroad, may not have been prepared in vain.' 'So let it be,' 
replied Hara, the subduer of Indra. And thereupon Daksha knelt down upon the 
earth, and praised gratefully the author of righteousness, the three-eyed god 
Mahadeva, repeating the eight thousand names of the deity whose emblem is a 
bull." 




Footnotes 

01. The sacrifice of Daksha is a legend of some interest, from its historical 
and archeological relations. It is obviously intended to intimate a struggle 
between the worshippers of Siva and of Vishnu, in which at first the 
latter, but finally the former, acquired the ascendancy. It is also a 
favourite subject of Hindu sculpture, at least with the Hindus of the Saiva 
division, and makes a conspicuous figure both at Elephanta and Ellora. A 
representation of the dispersion and mutilation of the gods and sages by 
Virabhadra, at the former, is published in the Archaeologia, VII. 326, 
where it is described as the Judgment of Solomon! a figure of Virabhadra 
is given by Niebuhr, vol. II. tab. 10: and the entire group in the Bombay 
Transactions, vol. I. It is described, but Mr. Erskine has not verified the 
subject, although it cannot admit of doubt. The groupe described, 
probably represents the introductory details given in our text. Of the 
Ellora sculptures, a striking one occurs in what Sir C. Malet calls the 
Doomar Leyna cave, where is "Veer Budder, with eight hands. In one is 
suspended the slain Rajah Dutz." A. R. VI. 396. And there is also a 
representation of 'Ehr Budr,' in one of the colonades of Kailas; being, in 
fact, the same figure as that at Elephanta. Bombay Tr. III. 287. The 
legend of Daksha therefore was popular when those cavern temples were 
excavated. The story is told in much more detail in several other Purarias, 
and with some variations, which will be noticed: but the above has been 
selected as a specimen of the style of the Vayu Puraria, and as being a 


narration which, from its inartificial, obscure, tautological, and 
uncircumstantial construction, is probably of an ancient date. The same 
legend, in the same words, is given in the Brahma P. 

02. Or this may he understood to imply, that the original story is in the 
Vedas; the term being, as usual in such a reference, ###. Gangadwara, the 
place where the Ganges descends to the plains—or Haridwar, as it is more 
usually termed—is usually specified as the scene of action, The Linga is 
more precise, calling it Kanakhala, which is the village still called 
Kankhal, near Haridwar (Megha Duta). It rather inaccurately, however, 
describes this as upon Hansa peak, a point of the Himalaya. 

03. The Kurma P. gives also this discussion between Dadhicha and Daksha, 
and their dialogue contains some curious matter. Daksha, for instance, 
states that no portion of a sacrifice is ever allotted to Siva, and no prayers 
are directed to be addressed to him, or to his bride. Dadhicha apparently 
evades the objection, and claims a share for Rudra, consisting of the triad 
of gods, as one with the sun, who is undoubtedly hymned by the several 
ministering priests of the Vedas. Daksha replies, that the twelve Adityas 
receive special oblations; that they are all the suns; and that he knows of 
no other. The Munis, who overhear the dispute, concur in his sentiments. 
These notions seem to have been exchanged for others in the days of the 
Padma P. and Bhagavata, as they place Daksha's neglect of Siva to the 
latter's filthy practices, his going naked, smearing himself with ashes, 
carrying a skull, and behaving as if he were drunk or crazed: alluding, no 
doubt, to the practices of Saiva mendicants, who seem to have abounded 
in the days of Sankara Acharya, and since. There is no discussion in the 
Bhagavata, but Rudra is described as present at a former assembly, when 
his father-in-law censured him before the guests, and in consequence he 
departed in a rage. His follower Nandi curses the company, and Bhrigu 
retorts in language descriptive of the Vamacharis, or left hand 
worshippers of Siva. "May all those," he says, "who adopt the worship of 
Bhava (Siva), all those who follow the practices of his worshippers, 
become heretics, and oppugners of holy doctrines; may they neglect the 
observances of purification; may they be of infirm intellects, wearing 
clotted hair, and ornamenting themselves with ashes and bones; and may 
they enter the Saiva initiation, in which spirituous liquor is the libation." 

04. This simple account of Sati's share in the transaction is considerably 
modified in other accounts. In the Kurma, the quarrel begins with Daksha 



the patriarch's being, as he thinks, treated by his son-in-law with less 
respect than is his due. Upon his daughter Sati's subsequently visiting 
him, he abuses her husband, and turns her out of his house. She in spite 
destroys herself. Siva, hearing of this, comes to Daksha, and curses him 
to be born as a Kshetriya, the son of the Prachetasas, and to beget a son 
on his own daughter. It is in this subsequent birth that the sacrifice 
occurs. The Linga and Matsya allude to the dispute between Daksha and 
Sati, and to the latter's putting an end to herself by Yoga. The Padma, 
Bhagavata, and Skanda in the Kasi Khanda, relate the dispute between 
father and daughter in a like manner, and in more detail. The first refers 
the death of Sag, however, to a prior period; and that and the Bhagavata 
both ascribe it to Yoga. The Kasi Khanda, with an improvement 
indicative of a later age, makes Sati throw herself into the fire prepared 
for the solemnity. 

05. The description of Virabhadra and his followers is given in other Puranas 
in the same strain, but with less detail. 

06. Their exploits, and those of Virabhadra, are more particularly specified 
elsewhere, especially in the Linga, Kurma, and Bhagavata Puranas. Indra 
is knocked down and trampled on; Yama has his staff broken; Saraswati 
and the Matris have their noses cut off; Mitra or Bhaga has his eyes 
pulled out; Pusha has his teeth knocked down his throat; Chandra is 
pummelled; Vahni's hands are cut off; Bhrigu loses his beard; the 
Brahmans are pelted with stones; the Prajapatis are beaten; and the gods 
and demigods are run through with swords or stuck with arrows. 

07. This is also mentioned in the Linga and in the Hari Vansa: and the latter 
thus accounts for the origin of the constellation Mrigasiras; Yajna, with 
the head of a deer, being elevated to the planetary region, by Brahma. 

08. As he prays to Siva presently, it could not well be meant here that Daksha 
was decapitated, although that is the story in other places. The Linga and 
Bhagavata both state that Virabhadra cut off Daksha's head, and threw it 
into the fire. After the fray therefore, when Siva restored the dead to life, 
and the mutilated to their limbs, Daksha's head was not forthcoming: it 
was therefore replaced by the head of a goat, or, according to the Kasi 
Khanda, that of a ram. No notice is taken in our text of the conflict 
elsewhere described between Virabhadra and Vishnu. In the Linga, the 
latter is beheaded, and his head is blown by the wind into the fire. The 
Kurma, though a Saiva Purana, is less irreverent towards Vishnu, and 


after describing a contest in which both parties occasionally prevail, 
makes Brahma interpose, and separate the combatants. The Kasi Khanda 
of the Skanda P. describes Vishnu as defeated, and at the mercy of 
Virabhadra, who is prohibited by a voice from heaven from destroying 
his antagonist: whilst in the Hari Vansa, Vishnu compels Siva to fly, after 
taking him by the throat and nearly strangling him. The blackness of 
Siva's neck arose from this throttling, and not, as elsewhere described, 
from his drinking the poison produced at the churning of the ocean. 




09. Chapter 


Legend of Lakshmi. Durvasas gives a garland to Indra: he treats it 
disrespectfully, and is cursed by the Muni. The power of the gods impaired: they 
are oppressed by the Danavas, and have recourse to Vishnu. The churning of the 
ocean. Praises of Sri. 

PARASARA.—But with respect to the question thou hast asked me, Maitreya, 
relating to the history of Sri, hear from me the tale as it was told to me by 
Marichi. 

Durvasas, a portion of Sankara (Siva), was wandering over the earth; when be 
beheld, in the hands of a nymph of air, a garland of flowers culled from the trees 
of heaven, the fragrant odour of which spread throughout the forest, and 
enraptured all who dwelt beneath its shade. The sage, who was then possessed 
by religious phrensy, when he beheld that garland, demanded it of the graceful 
and full-eyed nymph, who, bowing to him reverentially, immediately presented it 
to him. He, as one frantic, placed the chaplet upon his brow, and thus decorated 
resumed his path; when he beheld (Indra) the husband of Sachi, the ruler of the 
three worlds, approach, seated on his infuriated elephant Airavata, and attended 
by the gods. The phrensied sage, taking from his head the garland of flowers, 
amidst which the bees collected ambrosia, threw it to the king of the gods, who 
caught it, and suspended it on the brow of Airavata, where it shone like the river 
Jahnavi, glittering on the dark summit of the mountain Kailasa. The elephant, 
whose eyes were dim with inebriety, and attracted by the smell, took hold of the 
garland with his trunk, and cast it on the earth. That chief of sages, Durvasas, 
was highly incensed at this disrespectful treatment of his gift, and thus angrily 
addressed the sovereign of the immortals: "Inflated with the intoxication of 
power, Vasava, vile of spirit, thou art an idiot not to respect the garland I 
presented to thee, which was the dwelling of Fortune (Sri). Thou hast not 
acknowledged it as a largess; thou hast not bowed thyself before me; thou hast 
not placed the wreath upon thy head, with thy countenance expanding with 
delight. Now, fool, for that thou hast not infinitely prized the garland that I gave 
thee, thy sovereignty over the three worlds shall be subverted. Thou confoundest 
me, Sakra, with other Brahmans, and hence I have suffered disrespect from thy 


arrogance: but in like manner as thou hast cast the garland I gave thee down on 
the ground, so shall thy dominion over the universe be whelmed in ruin. Thou 
hast offended one whose wrath is dreaded by all created things, king of the gods, 
even me, by thine excessive pride." 

Descending hastily from his elephant, Mahendra endeavoured to appease the 
sinless Durvasas: but to the excuses and prostrations of the thousand-eyed, the 
Muni answered, "I am not of a compassionate heart, nor is forgiveness congenial 
to my nature. Other Munis may relent; but know me, Sakra, to be Durvasas. 
Thou hast in vain been rendered insolent by Gautama and others; for know me, 
Indra, to be Durvasas, whose nature is a stranger to remorse. Thou hast been 

r 

flattered by Vasishtha and other tender-hearted saints, whose loud praises (lave 
made thee so arrogant, that thou hast insulted me. But who is there in the 
universe that can behold my countenance, dark with frowns, and surrounded by 
my blazing hair, and not tremble? What need of words? I will not forgive, 
whatever semblance of humility thou mayest assume." 

Having thus spoken, the Brahman went his way; and the king of the gods, 
remounting his elephant, returned to his capital Amaravati. Thenceforward, 
Maitreya, the three worlds and Sakra lost their vigour, and all vegetable 
products, plants, and herbs were withered and died; sacrifices were no longer 
offered; devout exercises no longer practised; men were no more addicted to 
charity, or any moral or religious obligation all the faculties of sense were 
obstructed by cupidity; and men's desires were excited by frivolous objects. 
Where there is energy, there is prosperity; and upon prosperity energy depends. 
How can those abandoned by prosperity be possessed of energy; and without 
energy, where is excellence? Without excellence there can be no vigour nor 
heroism amongst men: he who has neither courage nor strength, will be spurned 
by all: and he who is universally treated with disgrace, must suffer abasement of 
his intellectual faculties. 

The three regions being thus wholly divested of prosperity, and deprived of 
energy, the Danavas and sons of Diti, the enemies of the gods, who were 
incapable of steadiness, and agitated by ambition, put forth their strength against 
the gods. They engaged in war with the feeble and unfortunate divinities; and 
Indra and the rest, being overcome in fight, fled for refuge to Brahma, preceded 
by the god of flame (Hutasana). When the great father of the universe had heard 



all that had come to pass, he said to the deities, "Repair for protection to the god 
of high and low; the tamer of the demons; the causeless cause of creation, 
preservation, and destruction; the progenitor of the progenitors; the immortal, 
unconquerable Vishnu; the cause of matter and spirit, of his unengendered 
products; the remover of the grief of all who humble themselves before him: he 
will give you aid." Having thus spoken to the deities, Brahma proceeded along 
with them to the northern shore of the sea of milk; and with reverential words 
thus prayed to the supreme Hari:— 

"We glorify him who is all things; the lord supreme over all; unborn, 
imperishable; the protector of the mighty ones of creation; the unperceived, 
indivisible Narayana; the smallest of the smallest, the largest of the largest, of 
the elements; in whom are all things, from whom are all things; who was before 
existence; the god who is all beings; who is the end of ultimate objects; who is 
beyond final spirit, and is one with supreme soul; who is contemplated as the 
cause of final liberation by sages anxious to be free; in whom are not the 
qualities of goodness, foulness, or darkness, that belong to undeveloped nature. 
May that purest of all pure spirits this day be propitious to us. May that Hari be 
propitious to us, whose inherent might is not an object of the progressive chain 
of moments or of days, that make up time. May he who is called the supreme 
god, who is not in need of assistance, Hari, the soul of all embodied substance, 
be favourable unto us. May that Hari, who is both cause and effect; who is the 
cause of cause, the effect of effect; he who is the effect of successive effect; who 
is the effect of the effect of the effect himself; the product of the effect of the 
effect of the effect, or elemental substance; to him I bow. The cause of the cause; 
the cause of the cause of the cause; the cause of them all; to him I bow. To him 
who is the enjoyer and thing to be enjoyed; the creator and thing to be created; 
who is the agent and the effect; to that supreme being I bow. The infinite nature 
of Vishnu is pure, intelligent, perpetual, unborn, undecayable, inexhaustible, 
inscrutable, immutable; it is neither gross nor subtile, nor capable of being 
defined: to that ever holy nature of Vishnu I bow. To him whose faculty to create 
the universe abides in but a part of but the ten-millionth part of him; to him who 
is one with the inexhaustible supreme spirit, I bow: and to the glorious nature of 
the supreme Vishnu, which nor gods, nor sages, nor I, nor Sankara apprehend; 
that nature which the Yogis, after incessant effort, effacing both moral merit and 
demerit, behold to be contemplated in the mystical monosyllable Om: the 
supreme glory of Vishnu, who is the first of all; of whom, one only god, the 



triple energy is the same with Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva: oh lord of all, great 
soul of all, asylum of all, undecayable, have pity upon thy servants; oh Vishnu, 
be manifest unto us." 

Parasara continued.—The gods, having heard this prayer uttered by Brahma, 
bowed down, and cried, "Be favourable to us; be present to our sight: we bow 
down to that glorious nature which the mighty Brahma does not know; that 
which is thy nature, oh imperishable, in whom the universe abides." Then the 
gods having ended, Vrihaspati and the divine Rishis thus prayed: "We bow down 
to the being entitled to adoration; who is the first object of sacrifice; who was 
before the first of things; the creator of the creator of the world; the undefinable: 
oh lord of all that has been or is to be; imperishable type of sacrifice; have pity 
upon thy worshippers; appear to them, prostrate before thee. Here is Brahma; 
here is Trilochana (the three-eyed Siva), with the Rudras; Pusha, (the sun), with 
the Adityas; and Fire, with all the mighty luminaries: here are the sons of Aswini 
(the two Aswini Kumaras), the Vasus and all the winds, the Sadhyas, the 
Viswadevas, and Indra the king of the gods: all of whom bow lowly before thee: 
all the tribes of the immortals, vanquished by the demon host, have fled to thee 
for succour." 

Thus prayed to, the supreme deity, the mighty holder of the conch and discus, 
shewed himself to them: and beholding the lord of gods, bearing a shell, a 
discus, and a mace, the assemblage of primeval form, and radiant with embodied 
light, Pitamaha and the other deities, their eyes moistened with rapture, first paid 
him homage, and then thus addressed him: "Repeated salutation to thee, who art 
indefinable: thou art Brahma; thou art the wielder of the Pinaka bow (Siva); thou 
art Indra; thou art fire, air, the god of waters, the sun, the king of death (Yama), 
the Vasus, the Maruts (the winds), the Sadhyas, and Viswadevas. This assembly 
of divinities, that now has come before thee, thou art; for, the creator of the 
world, thou art every where. Thou art the sacrifice, the prayer of oblation, the 
mystic syllable Om, the sovereign of all creatures: thou art all that is to be 
known, or to be unknown: oh universal soul, the whole world consists of thee. 
We, discomfited by the Daityas, have fled to thee, oh Vishnu, for refuge. Spirit 
of all, have compassion upon us; defend us with thy mighty power. There will be 
affliction, desire, trouble, and grief, until thy protection is obtained: but thou art 
the remover of all sins. Do thou then, oh pure of spirit, shew favour unto us, who 
have fled to thee: oh lord of all, protect us with thy great power, in union with 



the goddess who is thy strength." Hari, the creator of the universe, being thus 
prayed to by the prostrate divinities, smiled, and thus spake: "With renovated 
energy, oh gods, I will restore your strength. Do you act as I enjoin. Let all the 
gods, associated with the Asuras, cast all sorts of medicinal herbs into the sea of 
milk; and then taking the mountain Mandara for the churning-stick, the serpent 
Vasuki for the rope, churn the ocean together for ambrosia; depending upon my 
aid. To secure the assistance of the Daityas, you must be at peace with them, and 
engage to give them an equal portion of the fruit of your associated toil; 
promising them, that by drinking the Amrita that shall be produced from the 
agitated ocean, they shall become mighty and immortal. I will take care that the 
enemies of the gods shall not partake of the precious draught; that they shall 
share in the labour alone." 

Being thus instructed by the god of gods, the divinities entered into alliance with 
the demons, and they jointly undertook the acquirement of the beverage of 
immortality. They collected various kinds of medicinal herbs, and cast them into 
the sea of milk, the waters of which were radiant as the thin and shining clouds 
of autumn. They then took the mountain Mandara for the staff; the serpent 
Vasuki for the cord; and commenced to churn the ocean for the Amrita. The 
assembled gods were stationed by Krishna at the tail of the serpent; the Daityas 
and Danavas at its head and neck. Scorched by the flames emitted from his 
inflated hood, the demons were shorn of their glory; whilst the clouds driven 
towards his tail by the breath of his mouth, refreshed the gods with revivifying 
showers. In the midst of the milky sea, Hari himself, in the form of a tortoise, 
served as a pivot for the mountain, as it was whirled around. The holder of the 
mace and discus was present in other forms amongst the gods and demons, and 
assisted to drag the monarch of the serpent race: and in another vast body he sat 
upon the summit of the mountain. With one portion of his energy, unseen by 
gods or demons, he sustained the serpent king; and with another, infused vigour 
into the gods. 

From the ocean, thus churned by the gods and Danavas, first uprose the cow 
Surabhi, the fountain of milk and curds, worshipped by the divinities, and beheld 
by them and their associates with minds disturbed, and eyes glistening with 
delight. Then, as the holy Siddhas in the sky wondered what this could be, 
appeared the goddess Varum (the deity of wine), her eyes rolling with 
intoxication. Next, from the whirlpool of the deep, sprang the celestial Parijata 



tree, the delight of the nymphs of heaven, perfuming the world with its 
blossoms. The troop of Apsarasas, the nymphs of heaven, were then produced, 
of surprising loveliness, endowed with beauty and with taste. The cool-rayed 
moon next rose, and was seized by Mahadeva: and then poison was engendered 
from the sea, of which the snake gods (Nagas) took possession. Dhanwantari, 
robed in white, and bearing in his hand the cup of Amrita, next came forth: 
beholding which, the sons of Diti and of Danu, as well as the Munis, were filled 
with satisfaction and delight. Then, seated on a full-blown lotus, and holding a 
water-lily in her hand, the goddess Sri, radiant with beauty, rose from the waves. 
The great sages, enraptured, hymned her with the song dedicated to her praise. 
Viswavasu and other heavenly quiristers sang, and Ghritachi and other celestial 
nymphs danced before her. Ganga and other holy streams attended for her 
ablutions; and the elephants of the skies, taking up their pure waters in vases of 
gold, poured them over the goddess, the queen of the universal world. The sea of 
milk in person presented her with a wreath of never-fading flowers; and the artist 
of the gods (Viswakerma) decorated her person with heavenly ornaments. Thus 
bathed, attired, and adorned, the goddess, in the view of the celestials, cast 
herself upon the breast of Hari; and there reclining, turned her eyes upon the 
deities, who were inspired with rapture by her gaze. Not so the Daityas, who, 
with Viprachitti at their head, were filled with indignation, as Vishnu turned 
away from them, and they were abandoned by the goddess of prosperity 
(Lakshmi.) 

The powerful and indignant Daityas then forcibly seized the Amrita-cup, that 
was in the hand of Dhanwantari: but Vishnu, assuming a female form, fascinated 
and deluded them; and recovering the Amrita from them, delivered it to the gods. 
Sakra and the other deities quaffed the ambrosia. The incensed demons, grasping 
their weapons, fell upon them; but the gods, into whom the ambrosial draught 
had infused new vigour, defeated and put their host to flight, and they fled 
through the regions of space, and plunged into the subterraneous realms of 
Patala. The gods thereat greatly rejoiced, did homage to the holder of the discus 
and mace, and resumed their reign in heaven. The sun shone with renovated 
splendour, and again discharged his appointed task; and the celestial luminaries 
again circled, oh best of Munis, in their respective orbits. Fire once more blazed 
aloft, beautiful in splendour; and the minds of all beings were animated by 
devotion. The three worlds again were rendered happy by prosperity; and Indra, 
the chief of the gods, was restored to power. Seated upon his throne, and once 



more in heaven, exercising sovereignty over the gods, Sakra thus eulogized the 
goddess who bears a lotus in her hand:— 

"I bow down to Sri, the mother of all beings, seated on her lotus throne, with 
eyes like full-blown lotuses, reclining on the breast of Vishnu. Thou art Siddhi 
(superhuman power): thou art Swadha and Swaha: thou art ambrosia (Sudha), 
the purifier of the universe: thou art evening, night, and dawn: thou art power, 
faith, intellect: thou art the goddess of letters (Saraswati). Thou, beautiful 
goddess, art knowledge of devotion, great knowledge, mystic knowledge, and 
spiritual knowledge which confers eternal liberation. Thou art the science of 
reasoning, the three Vedas, the arts and sciences thou art moral and political 
science. The world is peopled by thee with pleasing or displeasing forms. Who 
else than thou, oh goddess, is seated on that person of the god of gods, the 
wielder of the mace, which is made up of sacrifice, and contemplated by holy 
ascetics? Abandoned by thee, the three worlds were on the brink of ruin; but they 
have been reanimated by thee. From thy propitious gaze, oh mighty goddess, 
men obtain wives, children, dwellings, friends, harvests, wealth. Health and 
strength, power, victory, happiness, are easy of attainment to those upon whom 
thou smilest. Thou art the mother of all beings, as the god of gods, Hari, is their 
father; and this world, whether animate or inanimate, is pervaded by thee and 
Vishnu. Oh thou who purifiest all things, forsake not our treasures, our granaries, 
our dwellings, our dependants, our persons, our wives: abandon not our children, 
our friends, our lineage, our jewels, oh thou who abidest on the bosom of the god 
of gods. They whom thou desertest are forsaken by truth, by purity, and 
goodness, by every amiable and excellent quality; whilst the base and worthless 
upon whom thou lookest favourably become immediately endowed with all 
excellent qualifications, with families, and with power. He on whom thy 
countenance is turned is honourable, amiable, prosperous, wise, and of exalted 
birth; a hero of irresistible prowess: but all his merits and his advantages are 
converted into worthlessness from whom, beloved of Vishnu, mother of the 
world, thou avertest thy face. The tongues of Brahma, are unequal to celebrate 
thy excellence. Be propitious to me, oh goddess, lotus-eyed, and never forsake 
me more." 

Being thus praised, the gratified Sri, abiding in all creatures, and heard by all 
beings, replied to the god of a hundred rites (Satakratu); "I am pleased, monarch 
of the gods, by thine adoration. Demand from me what thou desirest: I have 



come to fulfil thy wishes." "If, goddess," replied Indra, "thou wilt grant my 
prayers; if I am worthy of thy bounty; be this my first request, that the three 
worlds may never again be deprived of thy presence. My second supplication, 
daughter of ocean, is, that thou wilt not forsake him who shall celebrate thy 
praises in the words I have addressed to thee." "I will not abandon," the goddess 
answered, "the three worlds again: this thy first boon is granted; for I am 
gratified by thy praises: and further, I will never turn my face away from that 
mortal who morning and evening shall repeat the hymn with which thou hast 
addressed me." 

Parasara proceeded.—Thus, Maitreya, in former times the goddess Sri conferred 
these boons upon the king of the gods, being pleased by his adorations; but her 
first birth was as the daughter of Bhrigu by Khyati: it was at a subsequent period 
that she was produced from the sea, at the churning of the ocean by the demons 
and the gods, to obtain ambrosia. For in like manner as the lord of the world, the 
god of gods, Janarddana, descends amongst mankind (in various shapes), so does 
his coadjutrix Sri. Thus when Hari was born as a dwarf, the son of Aditi, 
Lakshmi appeared from a lotus (as Padma, or Kamala); when he was born as 
Rama, of the race of Bhrigu (or Parasurama), she was Dharani; when he was 
Raghava (Ramachandra), she was Sita; and when he was Krishna, she became 
Rukmini. In the other descents of Vishnu, she is his associate. If he takes a 
celestial form, she appears as divine; if a mortal, she becomes a mortal too, 
transforming her own person agreeably to whatever character it pleases Vishnu 
to put on. Whosoever hears this account of the birth of Lakshmi, whosoever 
reads it, shall never lose the goddess Fortune from his dwelling for three 
generations; and misfortune, the fountain of strife, shall never enter into those 
houses in which the hymns to Sri are repeated. 

Thus, Brahman, have I narrated to thee, in answer to thy question, how Lakshmi, 
formerly the daughter of Bhrigu, sprang from the sea of milk; and misfortune 
shall never visit those amongst mankind who daily recite the praises of Lakshmi 
uttered by Indra, which are the origin and cause of all prosperity. 


Footnotes 


01. Durvasas was the son of Atri by Anasuya, and was an incarnation of a 
portion of Siva. 

02. Vidyadhari. These beings, male and female, are spirits of an inferior 
order, tenanting the middle regions of the atmosphere. According to the 
Vayu, the garland was given to the nymph by Devi. 

03. He observed the Vrata, or vow of insanity; equivalent to the ecstasies of 
some religious fanatics. In this state,' says the commentator, 'even saints 
are devils.' 

04. They became Nih-satwa; and Satwa is explained throughout by 
Dhairyya, 'steadiness,' 'fortitude.' 

05. The first effect of primary cause is nature, or Prakriti: the effect of the 
effect, or of Prakriti, is Mahat: effect in the third degree is Ahankara: in 
the fourth, or the effect of the effect (Ahankara) of the effect (Mahat) of 
the effect (Prakriti), is elementary substance, or Bhuta. Vishnu is each 
and all. So in the succeeding ascending scale, Brahma is the cause of 
mortal life; the cause of Brahma is the egg, or aggregate elementary 
matter: its cause is, therefore, elementary matter; the cause of which is 
subtile or rudimental matter, which originates from Ahankara, and so on. 
Vishnu is also each and all of these. 

06. With thy Sakti, or the goddess Sri or Lakshmi. 

07. Or with the Sukta, or hymn of the Vedas, commencing, "Hiranya 
vernam," &c. 

08. The churning of the ocean does not occur in several of the Puranas, and 
is but cursorily alluded to in the Siva, Linga, and Kurma Puranas. The 
Vayu and Padma have much the same narrative as that of our text; and so 
have the Agni and Bhagavata, except that they refer only briefly to the 
anger of Durvasas, without narrating the circumstances; indicating their 
being posterior, therefore, to the original tale. The part, however, 
assigned to Durvasas appears to be an embellishment added to the 
original, for no mention of him occurs in the Matsya P. nor even in the 
Hari Vansa, neither does it occur in what may be considered the oldest 
extant versions of the story, those of the Ramayana and Mahabharata: 
both these ascribe the occurrence to the desire of the gods and Daityas to 
become immortal. The Matsya assigns a similar motive to the gods, 
instigated by observing that the Daityas slain by them in battle were 
restored to life by Sukra with the Sanjivini, or herb of immortality, which 
he had discovered. The account in the Hari Vansa is brief and obscure, 


and is explained by the commentator as an allegory, in which the 
churning of the ocean typifies ascetic penance, and the ambrosia is final 
liberation: but this is mere mystification. The legend of the Ramayana is 
translated, vol. I. of the Serampore edition; and that of the Mahabharata 
by Sir C. Wilkins, in the notes to his translation of the Bhagavata Gita. 
See also the original text, Cal. ed. It has been presented to general readers 
in a more attractive form by my friend H. M. Parker, in his Draught of 
Immortality, printed with other poems, Lond. 1827. The Matsya P. has 
many of the stanzas of the Mahabharata interspersed with others. There is 
some variety in the order and number of articles produced from the 
ocean. As I have observed elsewhere (Hindu Theatre, I. 59. Lond. ed.), 
the popular enumeration is fourteen; but the Ramayana specifies but 
nine; the Mahabharata, nine; the Bhagavata, ten; the Padma, nine; the 
Vayu, twelve; the Matsya, perhaps, gives the whole number. Those in 
which most agree, are, 1. the Halahala or Kalakuta poison, swallowed by 
Siva: 2. Varum or Sura, the goddess of wine, who being taken by the 
gods, and rejected by the Daityas, the former were termed Suras, and the 
latter Asuras: 3. the horse Uchchaissravas, taken by Indra: 4. Kaustubha, 
the jewel worn by Vishnu: 5. the moon: 6. Dhanwantari, with the Amrita 
in his Kamaridalu, or vase; and these two articles are in the Vayu 
considered as distinct products: 7. the goddess Padma or Sri: 8. the 
Apsarasas, or nymphs of heaven: 9. Surabhi, or the cow of plenty: 10. the 
Parijata tree, or tree of heaven: 11. Airavata, the elephant taken by Indra. 
The Matsya adds, 12. the umbrella taken by Varuna: 13. the earrings 
taken by Indra, and given to Aditi: and apparently another horse, the 
white horse of the sun: or the number may be completed by counting the 
Amrita separately from Dhanwantari. The number is made up in the 
popular lists by adding the bow and the conch of Vishnu; but there does 
not seem to be any good authority for this, and the addition is a sectarial 
one: so is that of the Tulasi tree, a plant sacred to Krishna, which is one 
of the twelve specified by the Vayu P. The Uttara Khanda of the Padma 
P. has a peculiar enumeration, or, Poison; Jyeshtha or Alakshmi, the 
goddess of misfortune, the elder born to fortune; the goddess of wine; 
Nidra, or sloth; the Apsarasas; the elephant of Indra; Lakshmi; the moon; 
and the Tulasi plant. The reference to Mohini, the female form assumed 
by Vishnu, is very brief in our text; and no notice is taken of the story 
told in the Mahabharata and some of the Purarias, of the Daitya Rahu's 


insinuating himself amongst the gods, and obtaining a portion of the 
Amrita: being beheaded for this by Vishnu, the head became immortal, in 
consequence of the Amrita having reached the throat, and was transferred 
as a constellation to the skies; and as the sun and moon detected his 
presence amongst the gods, Rahu pursues them with implacable hatred, 
and his efforts to seize them are the causes of eclipses; Rahu typifying 
the ascending and descending nodes. This seems to be the simplest and 
oldest form of the legend. The equal immortality of the body, under the 
name Ketu, and his being the cause of meteorical phenomena, seems to 
have been an after-thought. In the Padma and Bhagavata, Rahu and Ketu 
are the sons of Sinhika, the wife of the Danava Viprachitti. 

09. The four Vidyas, or branches of knowledge, are said to be, Yajna vidya, 
knowledge or performance of religious rites; Maha vidya, great 
knowledge, the worship of the female principle, or Tantrika worship; 
Guhya vidya, knowledge of mantras, mystical prayers, and incantations; 
and Atma vidya, knowledge of soul, true wisdom. 

10. Or Vartta, explained to mean the Silpa sastra, mechanics, sculpture, and 
architecture; Ayur-veda, medicine, &c. 

11. The cause of this, however, is left unexplained. The Padma P. inserts a 
legend to account for the temporary separation of Lakshmi from Vishnu, 
which appears to be peculiar to that work. Bhrigu was lord of 
Lakshmipur, a city on the Narmada, given him by Brahma. His daughter 
Lakshmi instigated her husband to request its being conceded to her, 
which offending Bhrigu, he cursed Vishnu to be born upon earth ten 
times, to be separated from his wife, and to have no children. The legend 
is an insipid modern embellishment. 




10. Chapter 


The descendants of the daughters of Daksha married to the Rishis. 

MAITREYA.—Thou hast narrated to me, great Muni, all that I asked of thee: 
now resume the account of the creation subsequently to Bhrigu. 

PARASARA.—Lakshmi, the bride of Vishnu, was the daughter of Bhrigu by 
Khyati. They had also two sons, Dhatri and Vidhatri, who married the two 
daughters of the illustrious Meru, Ayati and Niryati; and had by them each a son, 
named Prana and Mrikanda. The son of the latter was Markandeya, from whom 
Vedasiras was born. The son of Prana was named Dyutimat, and his son was 
Rajavat; after whom, the race of Bhrigu became infinitely multiplied. 

Sambhuti, the wife of Marichi, gave birth to Paurnamasa, whose sons were 
Virajas and Sarvaga. I shall hereafter notice his other descendants, when I give a 
more particular account of the race of Marichi. 

The wife of Angiras, Smriti, bore daughters named Sinivali, Kuhu, Raka, and 
Anumati (phases of the moon). Anasuya, the wife of Atri, was the mother of 
three sinless sons, Soma (the moon), Durvasas, and the ascetic Dattatreya. 
Pulastya had, by Priti, a son called in a former birth, or in the Swayambhuva 
Manwantara, Dattoli, who is now known as the sage Agastya. Kshama, the wife 
of the patriarch Pulaha, was the mother of three sons, Karmasa, Arvarivat, and 
Sahishnu. The wife of Kratu, Sannati, brought forth the sixty thousand 
Balakhilyas, pigmy sages, no bigger than a joint of the thumb, chaste, pious, 
resplendent as the rays of the sun. Vasishtha had seven sons by his wife Urjja, 
Rajas, Gatra, Urddhabahu, Savana, Anagha, Sutapas, and Sukra, the seven pure 
sages. The Agni named Abhimani, who is the eldest born of Brahma, had, by 
Swaha, three sons of surpassing brilliancy, Pavaka, Pavamana, and Suchi, who 
drinks up water: they had forty-five sons, who, with the original son of Brahma 
and his three descendants, constitute the forty-nine fires. The progenitors (Pitris), 
who, as I have mentioned, were created by Brahma, were the Agnishwattas and 
Varhishads; the former being devoid of, and the latter possessed of, fires. By 
them, Swadha had two daughters, Mena and Dharani, who were both acquainted 


with theological truth, and both addicted to religious meditation; both 
accomplished in perfect wisdom, and adorned with all estimable qualities. Thus 
has been explained the progeny of the daughters of Daksha. He who with faith 
recapitulates the account, shall never want offspring. 


Footnotes 

01. The commentator interprets the text ### to refer to Prana: 'Vedasiras was 
born the son of Prana.' So the Bhagavata has ###. The Linga, the Vayu, 
and Markandeya, however, confirm our reading of the text, making 
Vedasiras the son of Markandeya. Prana, or, as read in the two former, 
Pandu, was married to Pundarika, and had by her Dyutimat, whose sons 
were Srijavana and Asruta or Asrutavrana. Mrikanda (also read 
Mrikandu) married Manaswini, and had Markandeya, whose son, by 
Murddhanya, was Vedasiras: he married Pivari, and had many children, 
who constituted the family, or Brahmanical tribe, of Bhargavas, sons of 
Bhrigu. The most celebrated of these was Usanas, the preceptor of the 
Daityas, who, according to the Bhagavata, was the son of Vedasiras; but 
the Vayu makes him the son of Bhrigu by Paulomi, and born at a 
different period. 

02. Alluding especially to Kasyapa, the son of Marichi, of whose posterity a 
full detail is subsequently given. The Bhagavata adds a daughter, 
Devakulya; and the Vayu and Linga, four daughters, Tushti, Pushti, 
Twisha, and Apachiti. The latter inserts the grandsons of Paurnamasa. 
Virajas, married to Gauri, has Sudhaman, a Lokapala, or ruler of the east 
quarter; and Parvasa (quasi Sarvaga) has, by Parvasi, Yajnavama and 
Kasyata, who were both founders of Gotras, or families. The names of all 
these occur in different forms in different MSS. 

03. The Bhagavata adds, that in the Swarochisha Manwantara the sages 
Uttathya and Vrihaspati were also sons of Angiras; and the Vayu, &c. 
specify Agni and Kirttimat as the sons of the patriarch in the first 
Manwantara. Agni, married to Sadwati, has Parjanya, married to Marichi; 
and their son is Hiranyaroman, a Lokapala. Kirttimat has, by Dhenuka, 
two sons, Charishnu and Dhritimat. 



04. The Bhagavata gives an account of Atri's penance, by which the three 
gods, Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva, were propitiated, and became, in 
portions of themselves, severally his sons, Soma, Datta, and Durvasas. 
The Vayu has a totally different series, or five sons, Satyanetra, Havya, 
Apomurtti, Sani, and Soma; and one daughter, Sruti, who became the 
wife of Kardama. 

05. The text would seem to imply that he was called Agastya in a former 
Manwantara, but the commentator explains it as above. The Bhagavata 
calls the wife of Pulastya, Havirbhu, whose sons were the Muni Agastya, 
called in a former birth Dahragni or Jatharagni, and Visravas. The latter 
had by Ilavila, the deity of wealth, Kuvera; and by Kesini, the Rakshasas 
Ravaria, Kumbhakarria, and Vibhisharia. The Vayu specifies three sons of 
Pulastya, Dattoli, Vedabahu, and Vinita; and one daughter, Sadwati, 
married (see note 3) to Agni. 

06. The Bhagavata reads Karmasreshtha, Variyas, and Sahishnu. The Vayu 
and Linga have Kardama and Ambarisha in place of the two first, and 
add Vanakapivat and a daughter, Pivari, married to Vedasiras (see note 1). 
Kardama married Sruti (note 4), and had by her Sankhapada, one of the 
Lokapalas, and a daughter, Kamya, married to Priyavrata. Vana-kapivat, 
also read Dhana-k. and Ghana-k., had a son, Sahishnu, married to 
Yasodhara, and they were the parents of Kamadeva. 

07. The different authorities agree in this place. The Vayu adds two 
daughters, Punya and Sumati, married to Yajnavama (see note 2). 

08. The Bhagavata has an entirely different set of names, or Chitraketu, 
Surochish, Virajas, Mitra, Ulwana, Vasubhridyana, and Dyumat. It also 
specifies Saktri and others, as the issue of a different marriage. The Vayu 
and Linga have the same sons as in our text, reading Putra and Hasta in 
place of Gatra: they add a daughter, Puridarika, married to Paridu (see 
note 1). The eldest son, according to the Vayu, espoused a daughter of 
Markarideya, and had by her the Lokapala of the west, Ketumat. The 
seven sons of Vasishtha are termed in the text the seven Rishis, appearing 
in that character in the third Manwantara. 

09. The eldest son of Brahma, according to the commentator, upon the 
authority of the Vedas. The Vayu P. enters into a very long detail of the 
names and places of the whole forty-nine fires. According to that, also, 
Pavaka is electric or Vaidynta fire; Pavamana is that produced by friction, 
or Nirmathya; and Suchi is solar, Saura, fire. Pavamana was the parent of 


Kavyavahana, the fire of the Pitris; Suchi of Havyavahana, the fire of the 
gods; and Pavamana of Saharaksha, the fire of the Asuras. The 
Bhagavata explains these different fires to be so many appellations of fire 
employed in the invocations with which different oblations to fire are 
offered in the ritual of the Vedas: ### explained by the commentator, 
###. 

10. According to the commentator, this distinction is derived from the Vedas. 
The first class, or Agnishwattas, consists of those householders who, 
when alive, did not maintain their domestic fires, nor offer burnt- 
sacrifices: the second, of those who kept up the household flame, and 
presented oblations with fire. Manu calls these Agnidagdhas and the 
reverse, which Sir W. Jones renders, 'consumable by fire,' &c. Kulluka 
Bhatta gives no explanation of them. The Bhagavata adds other classes of 
Pitris; or, the Ajyapas, drinkers of ghee;' and Somapas, drinkers of the 
acid juice.' The commentator, explaining the meaning of the terms 
Sagnayas and Anagnyas, has, ### which might be understood to signify, 
that the Pitris who are 'without fire' are those to whom oblations are not 
offered; and those 'with fire' are they to whom oblations are presented. 

11. The Vayu carries this genealogy forward. Dharani was married to Meru, 
and had by him Mandara and three daughters, Niyati, Ayati, and Vela: 
the two first were married to Dhatri and Vidhatri. Vela was the wife of 
Samudra, by whom she had Samudri, married to Prachinavarhish, and the 
mother of the ten Prachetasas, the fathers of Daksha, as subsequently 
narrated. Mena was married to Himavat, and was the mother of Mainaka, 
and of Ganga, and of Parvati or Uma. 

12. No notice is here taken of Sati, married to Bhava, as is intimated in c. 8, 
when describing the Rudras. Of these genealogies the fullest and 
apparently the oldest account is given in the Vayu P.: as far as that of our 
text extends, the two nearly agree, allowing for differences of appellation 
originating in inaccurate transcription, the names frequently varying in 
different copies of the same work, leaving it doubtful which reading 
should be preferred. The Bhagavata, as observed above, has created some 
further perplexity by substituting, as the wives of the patriarchs, the 
daughters of Kardama for those of Daksha. Of the general statement it 
may be observed, that although in some respects allegorical, as in the 
names of the wives of the Rishis and in others astronomical, as in the 
denominations of the daughters of Anginas yet it seems probable that it is 




not altogether fabulous, but that the persons in some instances had a real 
existence, the genealogies originating in imperfectly preserved traditions 
of the families of the first teachers of the Hindu religion, and of the 
descent of individuals who took an active share in its propagation. 




11. Chapter 


Legend of Dhruva, the son of Uttanapada: he is unkindly treated by his father's 
second wife: applies to his mother: her advice: he resolves to engage in religious 
exercises: sees the seven Rishis, who recommend him to propitiate Vishnu. 

PARASARA continued.—I mentioned to you, that the Manu Swayambhuva had 
two heroic and pious sons, Priyavrata and Uttanapada. Of these two, the latter 
had a son whom he dearly loved, Uttama, by his favourite wife Suruchi. By his 
queen, named Suniti, to whom he was less attached, he also had a son, called 
Dhruva. Observing his brother Uttama on the lap of his father, as he was seated 
upon his throne, Dhruva was desirous of ascending to the same place; but as 
Suruchi was present, the Raja did not gratify the desire of his son, respectfully 
wishing to be taken on his father's knee. Beholding the child of her rival thus 
anxious to be placed on his father's lap, and her own son already seated there, 
Suruchi thus addressed the boy: "Why, child, do you vainly indulge in such 
presumptuous hopes? You are born from a different mother, and are no son of 
mine, that you should aspire inconsiderately to a station fit for the excellent 
Uttama alone. It is true you are the son of the Raja, but I have not given you 
birth. This regal throne, the seat of the king of kings, is suited to my son only; 
why should you aspire to its occupation? why idly cherish such lofty ambition, 
as if you were my son? do you forget that you are but the offspring of Suniti." 

The boy, having heard the speech of his step-mother, quitted his father, and 
repaired in a passion to the apartment of his own mother; who, beholding him 
vexed, took him upon her lap, and, gently smiling, asked him what was the cause 
of his anger, who had displeased him, and if any one, forgetting the respect due 
to his father, had behaved ill to him. Dhruva, in reply, repeated to her all that the 
arrogant Suruchi had said to him in the presence of the king. Deeply distressed 
by the narrative of the boy, the humble Suniti, her eyes dimmed with tears, 
sighed, and said, "Suruchi has rightly spoken; thine, child, is an unhappy fate: 
those who are born to fortune are not liable to the insults of their rivals. Yet be 
not afflicted, my child, for who shall efface what thou hast formerly done, or 
shall assign to thee what thou hast left undone. The regal throne, the umbrella of 
royalty, horses and elephants, are his whose virtues have deserved them: 


remember this, my son, and be consoled. That the king favours Suruchi is the 
reward of her merits in a former existence. The name of wife alone belongs to 
such as I, who have not equal merit. Her son is the progeny of accumulated 
piety, and is born as Uttama: mine has been born as Dhruva, of inferior moral 
worth. Therefore, my son, it is not proper for you to grieve; a wise man will be 
contented with that degree which appertains to him: but if you continue to feel 
hurt at the words of Suruchi, endeavour to augment that religious merit which 
bestows all good; be amiable, be pious, be friendly, be assiduous in benevolence 
to all living creatures; for prosperity descends upon modest worth as water flows 
towards low ground." 

Dhruva answered; "Mother, the words that you have addressed to me for my 
consolation find no place in a heart that contumely has broken. I will exert 
myself to obtain such elevated rank, that it shall be revered by the whole world. 
Though I be not born of Suruchi, the beloved of the king, you shall behold my 
glory, who am your son. Let Uttama my brother, her child, possess the throne 
given to him by my father; I wish for no other honours than such as my own 
actions shall acquire, such as even my father has not enjoyed." 

Having thus spoken, Dhruva went forth from his mother's dwelling: he quitted 
the city, and entered an adjoining thicket, where he beheld seven Munis sitting 
upon hides of the black antelope, which they had taken from off their persons, 
and spread over the holy kusa grass. Saluting them reverentially, and bowing 
humbly before then, the prince said, "Behold in me, venerable men, the son of 
Uttanapada, born of Suniti. Dissatisfied with the world, I appear before you." 
The Rishis replied; "The son of a king, and but four or five years of age, there 
can be no reason, child, why you should be dissatisfied with life; you cannot be 
in want of any thing whilst the king your father reigns; we cannot imagine that 
you suffer the pain of separation from the object of your affections; nor do we 
observe in your person any sign of disease. What is the cause of your discontent? 
Tell us, if it is known to yourself." 

Dhruva then repeated to the Rishis what Suruchi had spoken to him; and when 
they had heard his story, they said to one another, "How surprising is the 
vehemence of the Kshetriya nature, that resentment is cherished even by a child, 
and he cannot efface from his mind the harsh speeches of a step-mother. Son of a 
Kshetriya, tell us, if it be agreeable to thee, what thou hast proposed, through 



dissatisfaction with the world, to accomplish. If thou wishest our aid in what 
thou hast to do, declare it freely, for we perceive that thou art desirous to speak." 

Dhruva said; "Excellent sages, I wish not for riches, neither do I want dominion: 
I aspire to such a station as no one before me has attained. Tell me what I must 
do to effect this object; how I may reach an elevation superior to all other 
dignities." The Rishis severally thus replied.—Marichi said; "The best of stations 
is not within the reach of men who fail to propitiate Govinda. Do thou, prince, 
worship the undecaying (Achyuta)." Atri said; "He with whom the first of spirits, 
Janarddana, is pleased, obtains imperishable dignity. I declare unto you the 
truth." Angiras said; "If you desire an exalted station, worship that Govinda in 
whom, immutable and undecaying, all that is, exists." Pulastya said; "He who 
adores the divine Hari, the supreme soul, supreme glory, who is the supreme 
Brahma, obtains what is difficult of attainment, eternal liberation." "When that 
Janarddana," observed Kratu, "who in sacrifices is the soul of sacrifice, and who 
in abstract contemplation is supreme spirit, is pleased, there is nothing man may 
not acquire." Pulaha said; "Indra, having worshipped" the lord of the world, 
obtained the dignity of king of the celestials. Do thou adore, pious youth, that 
Vishnu, the lord of sacrifice." "Any thing, child, that the mind covets," 

r 

exclaimed Vasishtha, "may be obtained by propitiating Vishnu, even though it he 
the station that is the most excellent in the three worlds." 

Dhruva replied to them; "You have told me, humbly bending before you, what 
deity is to be propitiated: now inform me what prayer is to he meditated by me, 
that will offer him gratification. May the great Rishis, looking upon me with 
favour, instmct me how I am to propitiate the god." The Rishis answered; 
"Prince, thou deservest to hear how the adoration of Vishnu has been performed 
by those who have been devoted to his service. The mind must first be made to 
forsake all external impressions, and a man must then fix it steadily on that being 
in whom the world is. By him whose thoughts are thus concentrated on one only 
object, and wholly filled by it; whose spirit is firmly under control; the prayer 
that we shall repeat to thee is to be inaudibly recited: 'Om! glory to Vasudeva, 
whose essence is divine wisdom; whose form is inscrutable, or is manifest as 
Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva.' This prayer, which was formerly uttered by your 
grandsire, the Manu Swayambhuva, and propitiated by which, Vishnu conferred 
upon him the prosperity he desired, and which was unequalled in the three 
worlds, is to be recited by thee. Do thou constantly repeat this prayer, for the 



gratification of Govinda." 




Footnotes 

01. The Matsya, Brahma, and Vayu Purarias speak of but one wife of 
Uttanapada, and call her Sunrita: they say also that she had four sons, 
Apaspati (or Vasu), Ayushmanta, Kirttimat, and Dhruva. The Bhagavata, 
Padma, and Naradiya have the same account as that of the text. 

02. The instructions of the Rishis amount to the performance of the Yoga. 
External impressions are first to be obviated by particular positions, 
modes of breathing, &c.: the mind must then be fixed on the object of 
meditation; this is Dharana: next comes the meditation, or Dhyana; and 
then the Japa, or inaudible repetition of a Mantra, or short prayer; as in 
the text. The subject of the Yoga is more fully detailed in a subsequent 
book. 




12. Chapter 


Dhruva commences a course of religious austerities. Unsuccessful attempts of 
Indra and his ministers to distract Dhruva's attention: they appeal to Vishnu, who 
allays their fears, and appears to Dhruva. Dhruva praises Vishnu, and is raised to 
the skies as the pole-star. 

THE prince, having received these instructions, respectfully saluted the sages, 
and departed from the forest, fully confiding in the accomplishment of his 
purposes. He repaired to the holy place, on the banks of the Yamuna, called 
Madhu or Madhuvana, the grove of Madhu, after the demon of that name, who 
formerly abided there. Satrughna (the younger brother of Rama) having slain the 
Rakshas Lavana, the son of Madhu, founded a city on the spot, which was 
named Mathura. At this holy shrine, the purifier from all sin, which enjoyed the 
presence of the sanctifying god of gods, Dhruva performed penance, as enjoined 
by Marichi and the sages: he contemplated Vishnu, the sovereign of all the gods, 
seated in himself. Whilst his mind was wholly absorbed in meditation, the 
mighty Hari, identical with all beings and with all natures, (took possession of 
his heart.) Vishnu being thus present in his mind, the earth, the supporter of 
elemental life, could not sustain the weight of the ascetic. As he stood upon his 
left foot, one hemisphere bent beneath him; and when he stood upon his right, 
the other half of the earth sank down. When he touched the earth with his toes, it 
shook with all its mountains, and the rivers and the seas were troubled, and the 
gods partook of the universal agitation. 

The celestials called Yamas, being excessively alarmed, then took counsel with 
Indra how they should interrupt the devout exercises of Dhruva; and the divine 
beings termed Kushmandas, in company with their king, commenced anxious 
efforts to distract his meditations. One, assuming the semblance of his mother 
Suniti, stood weeping before him, and calling in tender accents, "My son, my 
son, desist from destroying thy strength by this fearful penance. I have gained 
thee, my son, after much anxious hope: thou canst not have the cruelty to quit 
me, helpless, alone, and unprotected, on account of the unkindness of my rival. 
Thou art my only refuge; I have no hope but thou. What hast thou, a child but 
five years old, to do with rigorous penance? Desist from such fearful practices, 


that yield no beneficial fruit. First comes the season of youthful pastime; and 
when that is over, it is the time for study: then succeeds the period of worldly 
enjoyment; and lastly, that of austere devotion. This is thy season of pastime, my 
child. Hast thou engaged in these practices to put an end to thine existence? Thy 
chief duty is love for me: duties are according to time of life. Lose not thyself in 
bewildering error: desist from such unrighteous actions. If not, if thou wilt not 
desist from these austerities, I will terminate my life before thee." 

But Dhruva, being wholly intent on seeing Vishnu, beheld not his mother 
weeping in his presence, and calling upon him; and the illusion, crying out, "Fly, 
fly, my child, the hideous spirits of ill are crowding into this dreadful forest with 
uplifted weapons," quickly disappeared. Then advanced frightful Rakshasas, 
wielding terrible arms, and with countenances emitting fiery flame; and 
nocturnal fiends thronged around the prince, uttering fearful noises, and whirling 
and tossing their threatening weapons. Hundreds of jackals, from whose mouths 
gushed flame as they devoured their prey, were howling aloud, to appal the boy, 
wholly engrossed by meditation. The goblins called out, "Kill him, kill him; cut 
him to pieces; eat him, eat him;" and monsters, with the faces of lions and 
camels and crocodiles, roared and yelled with horrible cries, to terrify the prince. 
But all these uncouth spectres, appalling cries, and threatening weapons, made 
no impression upon his senses, whose mind was completely intent on Govinda. 
The son of the monarch of the earth, engrossed by one only idea, beheld 
uninterruptedly Vishnu seated in his soul, and saw no other object. 

All their delusive stratagems being thus foiled, the gods were more perplexed 
than ever. Alarmed at their discomfiture, and afflicted by the devotions of the 
boy, they assembled and repaired for succour to Hari, the origin of the world, 
who is without beginning or end; and thus addressed him: "God of gods, 
sovereign of the world, god supreme, and infinite spirit, distressed by the 
austerities of Dhruva, we have come to thee for protection. As the moon 
increases in his orb day by day, so this youth advances incessantly towards 
superhuman power by his devotions. Terrified by the ascetic practices of the son 
of Uttanapada, we have come to thee for succour. Do thou allay the fervour of 
his meditations. We know not to what station he aspires: to the throne of Indra, 
the regency of the solar or lunar sphere, or to the sovereignty of riches or of the 
deep. Have compassion on us, lord; remove this affliction from Our breasts; 
divert the son of Uttanapada from persevering in his penance." Vishnu replied to 



the gods; "The lad desireth neither the rank of Indra, nor the solar orb, nor the 
sovereignty of wealth or of the ocean: all that he solicits, I will grant. Return 
therefore, deities, to your mansions as ye list, and be no more alarmed: I will put 
an end to the penance of the boy, whose mind is immersed in deep 
contemplation." 

The gods, being thus pacified by the supreme, saluted him respectfully and 
retired, and, preceded by Indra, returned to their habitations: but Hari, who is all 
things, assuming a shape with four arms, proceeded to Dhruva, being pleased 
with his identity of nature, and thus addressed him: "Son of Uttanapada, be 
prosperous. Contented with thy devotions, I, the giver of boons, am present. 
Demand what boon thou desirest. In that thou hast wholly disregarded external 
objects, and fixed thy thoughts on me, I am well pleased with thee. Ask, 
therefore, a suitable reward." The boy, hearing these words of the god of gods, 
opened his eyes, and beholding that Hari whom he had before seen in his 
meditations actually in his presence, bearing in his hands the shell, the discus, 
the mace, the bow, and scimetar, and crowned with a diadem, the bowed his head 
down to earth; the hair stood erect on his brow, and his heart was depressed with 
awe. He reflected how best he should offer thanks to the god of gods; what he 
could say in his adoration; what words were capable of expressing his praise: 
and being overwhelmed with perplexity, he had recourse for consolation to the 
deity. "If," he exclaimed, "the lord is contented with my devotions, let this be my 
reward, that I may know how to praise him as I wish. How can I, a child, 
pronounce his praises, whose abode is unknown to Brahma and to others learned 
in the Vedas? My heart is overflowing with devotion to thee: oh lord, grant me 
the faculty worthily to lay mine adorations at thy feet." 

Whilst lowly bowing, with his hands uplifted to his forehead, Govinda, the lord 
of the world, touched the son of Uttanapada with the tip of his conch-shell, and 
immediately the royal youth, with a countenance sparkling with delight, praised 
respectfully the imperishable protector of living beings. "I venerate," exclaimed 
Dhruva, "him whose forms are earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intellect, the 
first element (Ahankara), primeval nature, and the pure, subtile, all-pervading 
soul, that surpasses nature. Salutation to that spirit that is void of qualities; that is 
supreme over all the elements and all the objects of sense, over intellect, over 
nature and spirit. I have taken refuge with that pure form of thine, oh supreme, 
which is one with Brahma, which is spirit, which transcends all the world. 



Salutation to that form which, pervading and supporting all, is designated 
Brahma, unchangeable, and contemplated by religious sages. Thou art the male 
with a thousand heads, a thousand eyes, a thousand feet, who traversest the 
universe, and passest ten inches beyond its contact. Whatever has been, or is to 
be, that, Purushottama, thou art. From thee sprang Virat, Swarat, Samrat, and 
Adhipurusha. The lower, and upper, and middle parts of the earth are not 
independent of thee: from thee is all this universe, all that has been, and that 
shall be: and all this world is in thee, assuming this universal form. From thee is 
sacrifice derived, and all oblations, and curds, and ghee, and animals of either 
class (domestic or wild). From thee the Rig-Veda, the Sanaa, the metres of the 
Vedas, and the Yajur-Veda are born. Horses, and cows having teeth in one jaw 
only, proceed from thee; and from thee come goats, sheep, deer. Brahmans 
sprang from thy mouth; warriors from thy arms; Vaisyas from thy thighs; and 
Sudras from thy feet. From thine eyes come the sun; from thine ears, the wind; 
and from thy mind, the moon: the vital airs from thy central vein; and fire from 
thy mouth: the sky from thy navel; and heaven from thy head: the regions from 
thine ears; the earth from thy feet. All this world was derived from thee. As the 
wide-spreading Nyagrodha (Indian fig) tree is compressed in a small seed, so, at 
the time of dissolution, the whole universe is comprehended in thee as its germ. 
As the Nyagrodha germinates from the seed, and becomes first a shoot, and then 
rises into loftiness, so the created world proceeds from thee, and expands into 
magnitude. As the bark and leaves of the Plantain tree are to be seen in its stem, 
so thou art the stem of the universe, and all things are visible in thee. The 
faculties of the intellect, that are the cause of pleasure and of pain, abide in thee 
as one with all existence; but the sources of pleasure and of pain, singly or 
blended, do not exist in thee, who art exempt from all qualities. Salutation to 
thee, the subtile rudiment, which, being single, becomes manifold, Salutation to 
thee, soul of existent things, identical with the great elements. Thou, 
imperishable, art beheld in spiritual knowledge as perceptible objects, as nature, 
as spirit, as the world, as Brahma, as Manu, by internal contemplation. But thou 
art in all, the element of all; thou art all, assuming every form; all is from thee, 
and thou art from thyself. I salute thee, universal soul: glory be to thee. Thou art 
one with all things: oh lord of all, thou art present in all things. What can I say 
unto thee? thou knowest all that is in the heart, oh soul of all, sovereign lord of 
all creatures, origin of all things. Thou, who art all beings, knowest the desires of 
all creatures. The desire that I cherished has been gratified, lord, by thee: my 
devotions have been crowned with success, in that I have seen thee." 



Vishnu said to Dhruva; "The object of thy devotions has in truth been attained, in 
that thou hast seen me; for the sight of me, young prince, is never unproductive. 
Ask therefore of me what boon thou desirest; for men in whose sight I appear 
obtain all their wishes." To this, Dhruva answered; "Lord god of all creatures, 
who abidest in the hearts of all, how should the wish that I cherish be unknown 
to thee? I will confess unto thee the hope that my presumptuous heart has 
entertained; a hope that it would be difficult to gratify, but that nothing is 
difficult when thou, creator of the world, art pleased. Through thy favour, Indra 
reigns over the three worlds. The sister-queen of my mother has said to me, 
loudly and arrogantly, 'The royal throne is not for one who is not born of me;' 
and I now solicit of the support of the universe an exalted station, superior to all 
others, and one that shall endure for ever." Vishnu said to him; "The station that 
thou askest thou shalt obtain; for I was satisfied with thee of old in a prior 
existence. Thou wast formerly a Brahman, whose thoughts were ever devoted to 
me, ever dutiful to thy parents, and observant of thy duties. In course of time a 
prince became thy friend, who was in the period of youth, indulged in all sensual 
pleasures, .and was of handsome appearance and elegant form. Beholding, in 
consequence of associating with him, his affluence, you formed the desire that 
you might be subsequently born as the son of a king; and, according to your 
wish, you obtained a princely birth in the illustrious mansion of Uttanapada. But 
that which would have been thought a great boon by others, birth in the race of 
Swayambhuva, you have not so considered, and therefore have propitiated me. 
The man who worships me obtains speedy liberation from life. What is heaven 
to one whose mind is fixed on me? A station shall be assigned to thee, Dhruva, 
above the three worlds one in which thou shalt sustain the stars and the planets; a 
station above those of the sun, the moon, Mars, the son of Soma (Mercury), 
Venus, the son of Surya (Saturn), and all the other constellations; above the 
regions of the seven Rishis, and the divinities who traverse the atmosphere. 
Some celestial beings endure for four ages; some for the reign of a Manu: to thee 
shall be granted the duration of a Kalpa. Thy mother Suniti, in the orb of a bright 
star, shall abide near thee for a similar term; and all those who, with minds 
attentive, shall glorify thee at dawn or at eventide, shall acquire exceeding 
religious merit. 

Thus the sage Dhruva, having received a boon from Janarddana, the god of gods, 
and lord of the world, resides in an exalted station. Beholding his glory, Usanas, 



the preceptor of the gods and demons, repeated these verses: "Wonderful is the 
efficacy of this penance, marvellous is its reward, that the seven Rishis should be 
preceded by Dhruva. This too is the pious Suniti, his parent, who is called 
Sunrita." Who can celebrate her greatness, who, having given birth to Dhruva, 
has become the asylum of the three worlds, enjoying to all future time an 
elevated station, a station eminent above all? He who shall worthily describe the 
ascent into the sky of Dhruva, for ever shall be freed from all sin, and enjoy the 
heaven of Indra. Whatever be his dignity, whether upon earth or in heaven, he 
shall never fall from it, but shall long enjoy life, possessed of every blessing. 


Footnotes 

01. A marginal note by a Bengali Pundit asserts it to be a fact, then when a 
jackal carries a piece of meat in his mouth, it shews in the dark as if it was on 
fire. 

02. The commentator understands this passage to imply merely that the 
supreme pervades both substance and space, being infinitely vast, and without 
limit. 'Having a thousand heads,' &c. denotes only infinite extension: and the 
'ten inches beyond the contact of the universe' expresses merely non¬ 
restriction by its boundaries. 

03. Explained severally the Brahmanda, or material universe; Brahma, the 
creator; Manu, the ruler of the period; and supreme or presiding spirit. 

04. So the inscription upon the temple of Sais: ’Eyib dpi nav to yeyovoq, xai 
ov, Kai coogevov. So the Orphic verse, cited by Eusebius, beginning 

”Ev 5c Segac; [laoiAdov ev dj xaSc navxa kukAcitou, k.t.A. 

'One regal body in which all things are comprehended (viz. Virat), fire, and 
water, and earth, and air, and night, and day, and Intelligence (viz. Mahat) the 
first generator, and divine love; for all these does Jupiter include in his 
expansive form.' It proceeds also, precisely in the Pauranic strain, to describe 


the members of this universal form: the heaven is his head, the stars his hair, 
the sun and moon his eyes, &c. 

05. A piece of natural history quite correct as applied to the front teeth, which 
in the genus ox occur in the lower jaw only. 

06. This is also conformable to the doctrine, that the rudiments of plants exist 
in their cotyledons. 

07. In life, or living beings, perception depends not, according to Hindu 
metaphysics, upon the external senses, but the impressions made upon them 
are communicated to the mental organ or sense, and by the mind to the 
understanding--Samvid in the text—by which they are distinguished as 
pleasurable, painful, or mixed. But pleasure depends upon the quality of 
goodness, pain on that of darkness, and their mixture on that of foulness, 
inherent in the understanding; properties belonging to Jfveswara, or god, as 
one with life, or to embodied spirit, but not as Parameswara, or supreme spirit. 

08. The station or sphere is that of the north pole, or of the polar star. In the 
former case, the star is considered to be Suniti, the mother of Dhruva. The 
legend, although as it is related in our text it differs in its circumstances from 
the story told by Ovid of Callisto and her son Areas, whom Jove 

Imposuit caelo vicinaque sidera fecit, 

suggests some suspicion of an original identity. In neither of the authorities 
have we, perhaps, the primitive fable. It is evident from the quotation that 
presently follows in the text, of a stanza by Nanas, that the Purana has not the 
oldest version of the legend; and Ovid's representation of it is after a fashion 
of his own: all that has been retained of the original is the conformity of the 
characters and of the main incident, the translation of a mother and her son to 
the heavens as constellations, in which the pole-star is the most conspicuous 
luminary. 

09. The Vaimanika devas, the deities who travel in Vimanas, 'heavenly cars,' 
or rather 'moving spheres.' 


10. The text says merely ###; the commentator says, 'perhaps formerly so 
called;' ###. We have already remarked that some Puranas so denominate her. 


11. The legend of Dhruva is narrated in the Bhagavata, Padma (Swerga 
Kharida), Agni, and Naradiya, much to the same purport, and partly in the 
same words, as our text. The Brahma and its double the Hari Vansa, the 
Matsya, and Vayu merely allude to Dhruva's having been transferred by 
Brahma to the skies, in reward of his austerities. The story of his religious 
penance, and adoration of Vishnu, seems to be an embellishment interpolated 
by the Vaishriava Puranas, Dhruva being adopted as a saint by their sect. The 
allusion to Sunrita in our text concurs with the form of the story as it appears 
elsewhere, to indicate the priority of the more simple legend. 






13. Chapter 


Posterity of Dhruva. Legend of Vena: his impiety: he is put to death by the 
Rishis. Anarchy ensues. The production of Nishada and Prithu: the latter the first 
king. The origin of Suta and Magadha: they enumerate the duties of kings. Prithu 
compels Earth to acknowledge his authority: he levels it: introduces cultivation: 
erects cities. Earth called after him Prithivi: typified as a cow. 

PARASARA.—The sons of Dhruva, by his wife Sambhu, were Bhavya and 
Slishti. Suchchaya, the wife of the latter, was the mother of five virtuous sons, 
Ripu, Ripunjaya, Vipra, Vrikala, and Vrikatejas. The son of Ripu, by Vrihati, was 
the illustrious Chakshusha, who begot the Manu Chakshusha on Pushkarim, of 
the family of Varuna, the daughter of the venerable patriarch Anaranya. The 
Manu had, by his wife Navala, the daughter of the patriarch Vairaja, ten noble 
sons, Uru, Pura, Satadyumna, Tapaswi, Satyavak, Kavi, Agnishtoma, Atiratra, 
Sudyumna, and Abhimanyu. The wife of Uru, Agneyi, bore six excellent sons, 
Anga, Sumanas, Swati, Kratu, Angiras, and Siva. Anga had, by his wife Sunitha, 
only one son, named Vena, whose right arm was rubbed by the Rishis, for the 
purpose of producing from it progeny. From the arm of Vena, thus rubbed, 
sprang a celebrated monarch, named Prithu, by whom, in olden time, the earth 
was milked for the advantage of mankind. 

MAITREYA.—Best of Munis, tell me why was the right hand of Vena rubbed by 
the holy sages, in consequence of which the heroic Prithu was produced. 

PARASARA.—Sunitha was originally the daughter of Mrityu, by whom she was 
given to Anga to wife. She bore him Vena, who inherited the evil propensities of 
his maternal grandfather. When he was inaugurated by the Rishis monarch of the 
earth, he caused, it to be every where proclaimed, that no worship should be 
performed, no oblations offered, no gifts bestowed upon the Brahmans. "I, the 
king," said he, "am the lord of sacrifice; for who but I am entitled to the 
oblations." The Rishis, respectfully approaching the sovereign, addressed him in 
melodious accents, and said, "Gracious prince, we salute you; hear what we have 
to represent. For the preservation of your kingdom and your life, and for the 
benefit of all your subjects, permit us to worship Hari, the lord of all sacrifice, 


the god of gods, with solemn and protracted ritesa portion of the fruit of which 
will revert to you . Vishnu, the god of oblations, being propitiated with sacrifice 
by us, will grant you, oh king, all your desires. Those princes have all their 
wishes gratified, in whose realms Hari, the lord of sacrifice, is adored with 
sacrificial rites." "Who," exclaimed Vena, "is superior to me? who besides me is 
entitled to worship? who is this Hari, whom you style the lord of sacrifice? 
Brahma, Janarddana. Sambhu, Indra, Vayu, Ravi (the sun), Hutabhuk (fire), 
Varuna, Dhata, Pusha, (the sun), Bhumi (earth), the lord of night (the moon); all 
these, and whatever other gods there be who listen to our vows; all these are 
present in the person of a king: the essence of a sovereign is all that is divine. 
Conscious of this, I have issued my commands, and look that you obey them. 
You are not to sacrifice, not to offer oblations, not to give alms. As the first duty 
of women is obedience to their lords, so observance of my orders is incumbent, 
holy men, on you." "Give command, great king," replied the Rishis, "that piety 
may suffer no decrease. All this world is but a transmutation of oblations; and if 
devotion be suppressed, the world is at an end." But Vena was entreated in vain; 
and although this request was repeated by the sages, he refused to give the order 
they suggested. Then those pious Munis were filled with wrath, and cried out to 
each other, "Let this wicked wretch be slain. The impious man who has reviled 
the god of sacrifice who is without beginning or end, is not fit to reign over the 
earth." And they fell upon the king, and beat him with blades of holy grass, 
consecrated by prayer, and slew him, who had first been destroyed by his 
impiety towards god. 

Afterwards the Munis beheld a great dust arise, and they said to the people who 
were nigh, "What is this?" and the people answered and said, "Now that the 
kingdom is without a king, the dishonest men have begun to seize the property 
of their neighbours. The great dust that you behold, excellent Munis, is raised by 
troops of clustering robbers, hastening to fall upon their prey." The sages, 
hearing this, consulted, and together rubbed the thigh of the king, who had left 
no offspring, to produce a son. From the thigh, thus rubbed, came forth a being 
of the complexion of a charred stake, with flattened features (like a negro), and 
of dwarfish stature. "What am I to do?" cried he eagerly to the Munis. "Sit 
down" (Nishida), said they; and thence his name was Nishada. His descendants, 
the inhabitants of the Vindhya mountain, great Muni, are still called Nishadas, 
and are characterized by the exterior tokens of depravity. By this means the 
wickedness of Versa was expelled; those Nishadas being born of his sins, and 



carrying them away. The Brahmans then proceeded to rub the right arm of the 
king, from which friction was engendered the illustrious son of Vena, named 
Prithu, resplendent in person, as if the blazing deity of Fire bad been manifested. 

There then fell from the sky the primitive bow (of Mahadeva) named Ajagava, 
and celestial arrows, and panoply from heaven. At the birth of Prithu all living 
creatures rejoiced; and Vena, delivered by his being born from the hell named 
Put, ascended to the realms above. The seas and rivers, bringing jewels from 
their depths, and water to perform the ablutions of his installation, appeared. The 
great parent of all, Brahma, with the gods and the descendants of Angiras (the 
fires), and with all things animate or inanimate, assembled and performed the 
ceremony of consecrating the son of Vena. Beholding in his right hand the (mark 
of the) discus of Vishnu, Brahma recognised a portion of that divinity in Prithu, 
and was much pleased; for the mark of Vishnu's discus is visible in the hand of 
one who is born to be a universal emperor, one whose power is invincible even 
by the gods. 

The mighty Prithu, the son of Veda, being thus invested with universal dominion 
by those who were skilled in the rite, soon removed the grievances of the people 
whom his father had oppressed, and from winning their affections he derived the 
title of Raja, or king. The waters became solid, when he traversed the ocean: the 
mountains opened him a path: his banner passed unbroken (through the forests): 
the earth needed not cultivation; and at a thought food was prepared: all kine 
were like the cow of plenty: honey was stored in every flower. At the sacrifice of 
the birth of Prithu, which was performed by Brahma, the intelligent Suta (herald 
or bard) was produced, in the juice of the moon-plant, on the very birth-day at 
that great sacrifice also was produced the accomplished Magadha: and the holy 
sages said to these two persons, "Praise ye the king Prithu, the illustrious son of 
Vena; for this is your especial function, and here is a fit subject for your praise." 
But they respectfully replied to the Brahmans, "We know not the acts of the 
new-born king of the earth; his merits are not understood by us; his fame is not 
spread abroad: inform us upon what subject we may dilate in his praise." "Praise 
the king," said the Rishis, "for the acts this heroic monarch will perform; praise 
him for the virtues he will display." 

The king, hearing these words, was much pleased, and reflected that persons 
acquire commendation by virtuous actions, and that consequently his virtuous 



conduct would be the theme of the eulogium which the bards were about to 
pronounce: whatever merits, then, they should panegyrize in their encomium, he 
determined that he would endeavour to acquire; and if they should point out 
what faults ought to be avoided, he would try to shun them. He therefore listened 
attentively, as the sweet-voiced encomiasts celebrated the future virtues of 
Prithu, the enlightened son of Vena. 

"The king is a speaker of truth, bounteous, an observer of his promises; he is 
wise, benevolent, patient, valiant, and a terror to the wicked; he knows his 
duties; he acknowledges services; he is compassionate and kind-spoken; he 
respects the venerable; he performs sacrifices; he reverences the Brahmans; he 
cherishes the good; and in administering justice is indifferent to friend or foe." 

The virtues thus celebrated by the Suta and the Magadha were cherished in the 
remembrance of the Raja, and practised by him when occasion arose. Protecting 
this earth, the monarch performed many great sacrificial ceremonies, 
accompanied by liberal donations. His subjects soon approached him, suffering 
from the famine by which they were afflicted, as all the edible plants had 
perished during the season of anarchy. In reply to his question of the cause of 
their coming, they told him, that in the interval in which the earth was without a 
king all vegetable products had been withheld, and that consequently the people 
had perished. "Thou," said they, "art the bestower of subsistence to us; thou art 
appointed, by the creator, the protector of the people: grant us vegetables, the 
support of the lives of thy subjects, who are perishing with hunger." 

On hearing this, Prithu took up his divine bow Ajagava, and his celestial arrows, 
and in great wrath marched forth to assail the Earth. Earth, assuming the figure 
of a cow, fled hastily from him, and traversed, through fear of the king, the 
regions of Brahma and the heavenly spheres; but wherever went the supporter of 
living things, there she beheld Vairiya with uplifted weapons: at last, trembling 
with terror, and anxious to escape his arrows, the Earth addressed Prithu, the 
hero of resistless prowess. "Know you not, king of men," said the Earth, "the sin 
of killing a female, that you thus perseveringly seek to slay me." The prince 
replied; "When the happiness of many is secured by. the destruction of one 
malignant being, the death of that being is an act of virtue." "But," said the 
Earth, "if, in order to promote the welfare of your subjects, you put an end to me, 
whence, best of monarchs, will thy people derive their support." "Disobedient to 



my rule," rejoined Prithu, "if I destroy thee, I will support my people by the 
efficacy of my own devotions." Then the Earth, overcome with apprehension, 
and trembling in every limb, respectfully saluted the king, and thus spake: "All 
undertakings are successful, if suitable means of effecting them are employed. I 
will impart to you means of success, which you can make use of if you please. 
All vegetable products are old, and destroyed by me; but at your command I will 
restore them, as developed from my milk. Do you therefore, for the benefit of 
mankind, most virtuous of princes, give me that calf, by which I may be able to 
secrete milk. Make also all places level, so that I may cause my milk, the seed of 
all vegetation, to flow every where around." 

Prithu accordingly uprooted the mountains, by hundreds and thousands, for 
myriads of leagues, and they were thenceforth piled upon one another. Before his 
time there were no defined boundaries of villages or towns, upon the irregular 
surface of the earth; there was no cultivation, no pasture, no agriculture, no 
highway for merchants: all these things (or all civilization) originated in the 
reign of Prithu. Where the ground was made level, the king induced his subjects 
to take up their abode. Before his time, also, the fruits and roots which 
constituted the food of the people were procured with great difficulty, all 
vegetables having been destroyed; and he therefore, having made Swayambhuva 
Manu the calf, milked the Earth, and received the milk into his own hand, for the 
benefit of mankind. Thence proceeded all kinds of corn and vegetables upon 
which people subsist now and perpetually. By granting life to the Earth, Prithu 
was as her father, and she thence derived the patronymic appellation Prithivi (the 
daughter of Prithu). Then the gods, the sages, the demons, the Rakshasas, the 
Gandharbhas, Yakshas, Pitris, serpents, mountains, and trees, took a milking 
vessel suited to their kind, and milked the earth of appropriate milk, and the 
milker and the calf were both peculiar to their own species. 

This Earth, the mother, the nurse, the receptacle, and nourisher of all existent 
things, was produced from the sole of the foot of Vishnu. And thus was born the 
mighty Prithu, the heroic son of Vena, who was the lord of the earth, and who, 
from conciliating the affections of the people, was the first ruler to whom the 
title of Raja was ascribed. Whoever shall recite this story of the birth of Prithu, 
the son of Vena, shall never suffer any retribution for the evil he may have 
committed: and such is the virtue of the tale of Prithu's birth, that those who hear 
it repeated shall be relieved from affliction. 





Footnotes 

01. The descent of Puru from Dhruva is similarly traced in the Matsya 
Purana, but with some variety of nomenclature: thus the wife of Dhruva 
is named Dhanya; and the eldest son of the Manu, Taru. The Vayu 
introduces another generation, making the eldest son of Slishti, or as 

r 

there termed Pushti, father of Udaradhi; and the latter the father of Ripu, 
the father of Chakshusha, the father of the Manu. The Bhagavata has an 
almost entirely different set of names, having converted the family of 
Dhruva into personifications of divisions of time and of day and night. 
The account there given is, Dhruva had, by his wife Bhrami (revolving), 
the daughter of Sisumara (the sphere), Kalpa and Vatsara. The latter 
married Suvithi, and had six sons, Pushparria, Tigmaketu, Isha, Urjja, 
Vasu, Jaya. The first married Prabha and Dosha, and had by the former, 
Pratah (dawn), Madhyadina (noon), and Saya (evening); and by the latter, 
Pradosha, Nisitha, and Vyushta, or the beginning, middle, and end of 
night. The last has, by Pushkarim, Chakshush, married to Akuti, and the 
father of Chakshusha Manu. He has twelve sons, Pum, Kritsna, Rita, 
Dyumna, Satyavat, Dhrita, Vrata, Agnishtoma, Atiratra, Pradyumna, Sivi, 
and Ulmuka. The last is the father of six sons, named as in our text, 
except the last, who is called Gaya. The eldest, Anga, is the father of 
Vena, the father of Prithu. These additions are evidently the creatures of 
the author's imagination. The Brahma Purana and Hari Vansa have the 
same genealogy as the Vishnu, reading, as do the Matsya and Vayu, 
Pushkarini or Virarii, the daughter of Viraria, instead of Vanina. They, as 
well as copies of the text, present several other varieties of nomenclature. 
The Padma P. (Bhumi Kharida) says Anga was of the family of Atri, in 
allusion perhaps to the circumstance mentioned in the Brahma P. of 
Uttanapada's adoption by that Rishi. 

02. With the Dirghasatra, 'long sacrifice;' a ceremony lasting a thousand 
years. 

03. That is, the land will be fertile in proportion as the gods are propitiated, 
and the king will benefit accordingly, as a sixth part of the merit and of 
the produce will be his. So the commentator explains the word 'portion.' 


04. The Matsya says there were born outcast or barbarous races, Mlechchas, 
as black as collyrium. The Bhagavata describes an individual of dwarfish 
stature, with short arms and legs, of a complexion as black as a crow, 
with projecting chin, broad flat nose, red eyes, and tawny hair; whose 
descendants were mountaineers and foresters: The Padma (Bhu. Kh.) has 
a similar description, adding to the dwarfish stature and black 
complexion, a wide mouth, large ears, and a protuberant belly. It also 
particularizes his posterity as Nishadas, Kiratas, Bhillas, Bahanakas, 
Bhramaras, Pulindas, and other barbarians, or Mlechchas, living in 
woods and on mountains. These passages intend, and do not much 
exaggerate, the uncouth appearance of the Goands, Koles, Bhils, and 
other uncivilized tribes, scattered along the forests and mountains of 
central India, from Behar to Kandesh, and who are not improbably the 
predecessors of the present occupants of the cultivated portions of the 
country. They are always very black, ill-shapen, and dwarfish, and have 
countenances of a very African character. 

05. A Chakra-vertti, or, according to the text, one in whom the Chakra, the 
discus of Vishnu, abides (varttate); such a figure being delineated by the 
lines of the hand. The grammatical etymology is, 'he who abides in, or 
rules over, an extensive territory called a Chakra.' 

06. From raga, 'passion' or 'affection;' but the more obvious etymology is raj, 
to shine' or 'be splendid.' 

07. The birth of Prithu is to be considered as the sacrifice, of which Brahma, 
the creator, was the performer; but in other places, as in the Padma, it is 
considered that an actual sacrificial rite was celebrated, at which the first 
encomiasts were produced. The Bhagavata does not account for their 
appearance. 

08. 'Having willed or determined the Manu Swayambhuva to be the calf:' 
###. So the Padma P.: ###. The Bhagavata has, 'Having made the Manu 
the calf.' By the calf,' or Manu in that character, is typified, the 
commentator observes, the promoter of the multiplication of progeny: 
###. 

09. The Matsya, Brahma, Bhagavata, and Padma enter into a greater detail of 
this milking, specifying typically the calf, the milker, the milk, and the 
vessel. Thus, according to the Matsya, the Rishis milked the earth 
through Vrihaspati; their calf was Soma; the Vedas were the vessel; and 
the milk was devotion. When the gods milked the earth, the milker was 



Mitra (the sun); Indra was the calf; superhuman power was the produce. 
The gods had a gold, the Pitris a silver vessel: and for the latter, the 
milker was Antaka (death); Yama was the calf; the milk was Swadha, or 
oblation. The Naga, or snake-gods, had a gourd for their pail; their calf 
was Takshaka; Dhritarashtra (the serpent) was their milker; and their milk 
was poison. For the Asuras, Maya was the milk; Virochana, the son of 
Prahlada, was the calf; the milker was Dwimurddha; and the vessel was 
of iron. The Yakshas made Vaisravana their calf; their vessel was of 
unbaked earth; the milk was the power of disappearing. The Rakshasas 
and others employed Raupyanabha as the milker; their calf was Sumali; 
and their milk was blood. Chitraratha was the calf, Vasuruchi the milker, 
of the Gandharbas and nymphs, who milked fragrant odours into a cup of 
lotus leaves. On behalf of the mountains, Meru was the milker; Himavat 
the calf; the pail was of crystal; and the milk was of herbs and gems. The 
trees extracted sap in a vessel of the Palasa, the Sal being the milker, and 
the Plaksha the calf. The descriptions that occur in the Bhagavata, 
Padma, and Brahma Puranas are occasionally slightly varied, but they are 
for the most part in the same words as that of the Matsya. These 
mystifications are all probably subsequent modifications of the original 
simple allegory, which typified the earth as a cow, who yielded to every 
class of beings the milk they desired, or the object of their wishes. 

10. Another reading is, 'It counteracts evil dreams.' The legend of Prithu is 
briefly given in the Mahabharata, Raja Dherma, and occurs in most of the 
Puranas, but in greatest detail in our text, in the Bhagavata, and 
especially in the Padma, Bhumi Khanda, s. 29, 30. All the versions, 
however, are essentially the same. 




14. Chapter 


Descendants of Prithu. Legend of the Prachetasas: they are desired by their 
father to multiply mankind, by worshipping Vishnu: they plunge into the sea, 
and meditate on and praise him: he appears, and grants their wishes. 

PRITHU had two valiant sons, Antarddhi and Pali. The son of Antarddhana, by 
his wife Sikhandim, was Havirdhana, to whom Dhishana, a princess of the race 
of Agni, bore six sons, Prachinaverhis, Sukra, Gaya, Krishna, Vraja, and Ajina. 
The first of these was a mighty prince and patriarch, by whom mankind was 
multiplied after the death of Havirdhana. He was called Prachinaverhis from his 
placing upon the earth the sacred grass, pointing to the east. At the termination of 
a rigid penance the married Savarna, the daughter of the ocean, who had been 
previously betrothed to him, and who had by the king ten sons, who were all 
styled Prachetasas, and were skilled in military science: they all observed the 
same duties, practised religious austerities, and remained immersed in the bed of 
the sea for ten thousand years. 

MAITREYA.—You can inform me, great sage, why the magnanimous 
Prachetasas engaged in penance in the waters of the sea. 

PARASARA.—The sons of Prachinaverhis were originally informed by their 
father, who had been appointed as a patriarch, and whose mind was intent on 
multiplying mankind, that the had been respectfully enjoined by Brahma, the 
god of gods, to labour to this end, and that he had promised obedience: "now 
therefore," continued he, "do you, my sons, to oblige me, diligently promote the 
increase of the people, for the orders of the father of all creatures are entitled to 
respect." The sons of the king, having heard their father's words, replied, "So be 
it;" but they then inquired of him, as he could best explain it, by what means 
they might accomplish the augmentation of mankind. He said to them; "Whoever 
worships Vishnu, the bestower of good, attains undoubtedly the object of his 
desires: there is no other mode. What further can I tell you? Adore therefore 
Govinda, who is Hari, the lord of all beings, in order to effect the increase of the 
human race, if you wish to succeed. The eternal Purushottama is to be 
propitiated by him who wishes for virtue, wealth, enjoyment, or liberation. 


Adore him, the imperishable, by whom, when propitiated, the world was first 
created, and mankind will assuredly be multiplied." 

Thus instructed by their father, the ten Prachetasas plunged into the depths of the 
ocean, and with minds wholly devoted to Narayana, the sovereign of the 
universe, who is beyond all worlds, were engrossed by religious austerity for ten 
thousand years: remaining there, they with fixed thoughts praised Hari, who, 
when propitiated, confers on those who praise him all that they desire. 

MAITREYA.—The excellent praises that the Prachetasas addressed to Vishnu, 
whilst they stood in the deep, you, oh best of Munis, are qualified to repeat to 
me. 

PARASARA.—Hear, Maitreya, the hymn which the Prachetasas, as they stood in 
the waters of the sea, sang of old to Govinda, their nature being identified with 
him:— 

"We bow to him whose glory is the perpetual theme of every speech; him first, 
him last; the supreme lord of the boundless world; who is primeval light; who is 
without his like; indivisible and infinite; the origin of all existent things, 
movable or stationary. To that supreme being who is one with time, whose first 
forms, though he be without form, are day and evening and night, be adoration. 
Glory to him, the life of all living things, who is the same with the moon, the 
receptacle of ambrosia, drunk daily by the gods and progenitors: to him who is 
one with the sun, the cause of heat and cold and rain, who dissipates the gloom, 
and illuminates the sky with his radiance: to him who is one with earth, all- 
pervading, and the asylum of smell and other objects of sense, supporting the 
whole world by its solidity. We adore that form of the deity Hari which is water, 
the womb of the world, the seed of all living beings. Glory to the mouth of the 
gods, the eater of the Havya; to the eater of the Kavya, the mouth of the 
progenitors; to Vishnu, who is identical with fire; to him who is one with air, the 
origin of ether, existing as the five vital airs in the body, causing constant vital 
action; to him who is identical with the atmosphere, pure, illimitable, shapeless, 
separating all creatures. Glory to Krishna, who is Brahma in the form of sensible 
objects, who is ever the direction of the faculties of sense. We offer salutation to 
that supreme Hari who is one with the senses, both subtle and substantial, the 
recipient of all impressions, the root of all knowledge: to the universal soul, who, 



as internal intellect, delivers the impressions received by the senses to soul: to 
him who has the properties of Prakriti; in whom, without end, rest all things; 
from whom all things proceed; and who is that into which all things resolve. We 
worship that Purushottoma, the god who is pure spirit, and who, without 
qualities, is ignorantly considered as endowed with qualities. We adore that 
supreme Brahma, the ultimate condition of Vishnu, unproductive, unborn, pure, 
void of qualities, and free from accidents; who is neither high nor low, neither 
bulky nor minute, has neither shape, nor colour, nor shadow, nor substance, nor 
affection, nor body; who is neither etherial nor susceptible of contact, smell, or 
taste; who has neither eyes, nor ears, nor motion, nor speech, nor breath, nor 
mind, nor name, nor race, nor enjoyment, nor splendour; who is without cause, 
without fear, without error, without fault, undecaying, immortal, free from 
passion, without sound, imperceptible, inactive, independent of place or time, 
detached from all investing properties; but (illusively) exercising irresistible 
might, and identified with all beings, dependent upon none. Glory to that nature 
of Vishnu which tongue can not tell, nor has eye beheld." 

Thus glorifying Vishnu, and intent in meditation on him, the Prachetasas passed 
ten thousand years of austerity in the vast ocean; on which Hari, being pleased 
with them, appeared to them amidst the waters, of the complexion of the full¬ 
blown lotus leaf. Beholding him mounted on the king of birds, Garuda, the 
Prachetasas bowed down their heads in devout homage; when Vishnu said to 
them, "Receive the boon you have desired; for I, the giver of good, am content 
with you, and am present." The Prachetasas replied to him with reverence, and 
told him that the cause of their devotions was the command of their father to 
effect the multiplication of mankind. The god, having accordingly granted to 
them the object of their prayers, disappeared, and they came up from the water. 


Footnotes 

01. The text of the Vayu and Brahma (or Hari Vansa) read, like that of the 
Vishnu, ###. Mons. Langlois understands the two last words as a 
compound epithet; "Se jouirent dupouvoir de se rendre invisibles." The 
construction would admit of such a sense, but it seems more probable 



that they are intended for names. The lineage of Prithu is immediately 
continued through one of them, Antarddhana, which is the same as 
Antarddhi; as the commentator states with regard to that appellation, ###, 
and as the commentator on the Hari Vansa remarks of the succeeding 
name, 'one of the brothers being called Antarddhana or Antarddhi,' leaves 
no other sense for Palin but that of a proper name. The Bhagavata gives 
Prithu five sons, Vijitaswa, Haryyaksha, Dhumrakesa, Vrika, and 
Dravina, and adds that the elder was also named Antarddhana, in 
consequence of having obtained from Indra the power of making himself 
invisible. 

02. The Bhagavata, as usual, modifies this genealogy; Antarddhana has by 
Sikhandim three sons, who were the three fires, Pavaka, Pavamana, and 
Suchi, condemned by a curse of Vasishtha to be born again: by another 
wife, Nabhaswati, he has Havirddhana, whose sons are the same as those 
of the text, only giving another name, Varhishad as well as 
Prachinaverhis, to the first. According to the Mahabharata (Moksha 
Dharma), which has been followed by the Padma P., Prachinavarhis was 
born in the family of Atri. 

03. The text is, ###. Kusa or varhis is properly 'sacrificial grass' (Poa); and 
Prachinagra, literally, 'having its tips towards the east;' the direction in 
which it should be placed upon the ground, as a seat for the gods on 
occasion of offerings made to them. The name therefore intimates, either 
that the practice originated with him, or, as the commentator explains it, 
that he was exceedingly devout, offering sacrifices or invokingthe gods 
every where. The Hari Vansa adds a verse to that of our text, reading, 
###, which Mons. Langlois has rendered, 'Quand il marchoit sur la terre 
les pointes de cousa etoient courbees vers V Orient;' which he supposes to 
mean, 'Que ce prince avait tourne ses pensees et porte sa domination vers 
V Orient:' a supposition that might have been obviated by a little further 
consideration of the verse of Manu to which he refers. "If he have sitten 
on culms of grass with their points towards the east," &c. The 
commentary explains the passage as above, referring ### to ### not to 
### as, ###. 'He was called Prachinavarhis, because his sacred grass, 
pointing east, was going upon the very earth, or was spread over the 
whole earth.' The text of the Bhagavata also explains clearly what is 
meant: 'By whose sacred grass, pointing to the east, as he performed 
sacrifice after sacrifice, the whole earth, his sacrificial ground, was 






overspread 




15. Chapter 


The world overrun with trees: they are destroyed by the Prachetasas. Soma 
pacifies them, and gives them Marisha to wife: her story: the daughter of the 
nymph Pramlocha. Legend of Kandu. Marisha's former history. Daksha the son 
of the Prachetasas: his different characters: his sons: his daughters: their 
marriages and progeny: allusion to Prahlada, his descendant. 

WHILST the Prachetasas were thus absorbed in their devotions, the trees spread 
and overshadowed the unprotected earth, and the people perished: the winds 
could not blow; the sky was shut out by the forests; and mankind was unable to 
labour for ten thousand years. When the sages, coming forth from the deep, 
beheld this, they were angry, and, being incensed, wind and flame issued from 
their mouths. The strong wind tore up the trees by their roots, and left them sear 
and dry, and the fierce fire consumed them, and the forests were cleared away. 
When Soma (the moon), the sovereign of the vegetable world, beheld all except 
a few of the trees destroyed, he went to the patriarchs, the Prachetasas, and said, 
"Restrain your indignation, princes, and listen to me. I will form an alliance 
between you and the trees. Prescient of futurity, I have nourished with my rays 
this precious maiden, the daughter of the woods. She is called Marisha, and is 
assuredly the offspring of the trees. She shall be your bride, and the multiplier of 
the race of Dhruva. From a portion of your lustre and a portion of mine, oh 
mighty sages, the patriarch Daksha shall be born of her, who, endowed with a 
part of me, and composed of your vigour, shall be as resplendent as fire, and 
shall multiply the human race. 

"There was formerly (said Soma) a sage named Kandu, eminent in holy wisdom, 
who practised pious austerities on the lovely borders of the Gomati river. The 
king of the gods sent the nymph Pramlocha to disturb his penance, and the 
sweet-smiling damsel diverted the sage from his devotions. They lived together, 
in the valley of Mandara, for a hundred and fifty years; during which, the mind 
of the Muni was wholly given up to enjoyment. At the expiration of this period 
the nymph requested his permission to return to heaven; but the Muni, still 
fondly attached to her, prevailed upon her to remain for some time longer; and 
the graceful damsel continued to reside for another hundred years, and delight 


the great sage by her fascinations. Then again she preferred her suit to be 
allowed to return to the abodes of the gods; and again the Muni desired her to 
remain. At the expiration of more than a century the nymph once more said to 
him, with a smiling countenance, 'Brahman, I depart;' but the Muni, detaining 
the fine-eyed damsel, replied, 'Nay, stay yet a little; you will go hence for a long 
period.' Afraid of incurring an imprecation, the graceful nymph continued with 
the sage for nearly two hundred years more, repeatedly asking his permission to 
go to the region of the king of the gods, but as often desired by him to remain. 
Dreading to be cursed by him, and excelling in amiable manners, well knowing 
also the pain that is inflicted by separation from an object of affection, she did 
not quit the Muni, whose mind, wholly subdued by love, became every day more 
strongly attached to her. 

"On one occasion the sage was going forth from their cottage in a great hurry. 
The nymph asked him where he was going. 'The day,' he replied, 'is drawing fast 
to a close: I must perform the Sandhya worship, or a duty will be neglected.' The 
nymph smiled mirthfully as she rejoined, 'Why do you talk, grave sir, of this day 
drawing to a close: your day is a day of many years, a day that must be a marvel 
to all: explain what this means.' The Muni said, 'Fair damsel, you came to the 
river-side at dawn; I beheld you then, and you then entered my hermitage. It is 
now the revolution of evening, and the day is gone. What is the meaning of this 
laughter? Tell me the truth.' Pramlocha. answered, 'You say rightly,' venerable 
Brahman, 'that I came hither at morning dawn, but several hundred years have 
passed since the time of my arrival. This is the truth.' The Muni, on hearing this, 
was seized with astonishment, and asked her how long he had enjoyed her 
society: to which the nymph replied, that they had lived together nine hundred 
and seven years, six months, and three days. The Muni asked her if she spoke the 
truth, or if she was in jest; for it appeared to him that they had spent but one day 
together: to which Pramlocha replied, that she should not dare at any time to tell 
him who lived in the path of piety an untruth, but particularly when she had been 
enjoined by him to inform him what had passed. 

"When the Muni, princes, had heard these words, and knew that it was the truth, 
he began to reproach himself bitterly, exclaiming, 'Fie, fie upon me; my penance 
has been interrupted; the treasure of the learned and the pious has been stolen 
from me; my judgment has been blinded: this woman has been created by some 
one to beguile me: Brahma is beyond the reach of those agitated by the waves of 



infirmity. I had subdued my passions, and was about to attain divine knowledge. 
This was foreseen by him by whom this girl has been sent hither. Fie on the 
passion that has obstructed my devotions. All the austerities that would have led 
to acquisition of the wisdom of the Vedas have been rendered of no avail by 
passion that is the road to hell.' The pious sage, having thus reviled himself, 
turned to the nymph, who was sitting nigh, and said to her, 'Go, deceitful girl, 
whither thou wilt: thou hast performed the office assigned thee by the monarch 
of the gods, of disturbing my penance by thy fascinations. I will not reduce thee 
to ashes by the fire of my wrath. Seven paces together is sufficient for the 
friendship of the virtuous, but thou and I have dwelt together. And in truth what 
fault hast thou committed? why should I be wroth with thee? The sin is wholly 
mine, in that I could not subdue my passions: yet fie upon thee, who, to gain 
favour with Indra, hast disturbed my devotions; vile bundle of delusion.' 

"Thus spoken to by the Muni, Pramlocha stood trembling, whilst big drops of 
perspiration started from every pore; till he angrily cried to her, 'Depart, begone.' 
She then, reproached by him, went forth from his dwelling, and, passing through 
the air, wiped the perspiration from her person with the leaves of the trees. The 
nymph went from tree to tree, and as with the dusky shoots that crowned their 
summits she dried her limbs, which were covered with moisture, the child she 
had conceived by the Rishi came forth from the pores of her skin in drops of 
perspiration. The trees received the living dews, and the winds collected them 
into one mass. "This," said Soma, "I matured by my rays, and gradually it 
increased in size, till the exhalation that had rested on the tree tops became the 
lovely girl named Marisha. The trees will give her to you, Prachetasas: let your 
indignation be appeased. She is the progeny of Kandu, the child of Pramlocha, 
the nursling of the trees, the daughter of the wind and of the moon. The holy 
Kandu, after the interruption of his pious exercises, went, excellent princes, to 
the region of Vishnu, termed Purushottama, where, Maitreya, with his whole 
mind he devoted himself to the adoration of Hari; standing fixed, with uplifted 
arms, and repeating the prayers that comprehend the essence of divine truth." 

The Prachetasas said, "We are desirous to hear the transcendental prayers, by 
inaudibly reciting which the pious Kandu propitiated Kesava." On which Soma 
repeated as follows: '"Vishnu is beyond the boundary of all things: he is the 
infinite: he is beyond that which is boundless: he is above all that is above: he 
exists as finite truth: he is the object of the Veda; the limit of elemental being; 



unappreciable by the senses; possessed of illimitable might: he is the cause of 
cause; the cause of the cause of cause; the cause of finite cause; and in effects, 
he, both as every object and agent, preserves the universe: he is Brahma the lord; 
Brahma all beings; Brahma the progenitor of all beings; the imperishable: he is 
the eternal, undecaying, unborn Brahma, incapable of increase or diminution: 
Purushottama is the everlasting, untreated, immutable Brahma. May the 
imperfections of my nature be annihilated through his favour.' Reciting this 
eulogium, the essence of divine truth, and propitiating Kesava, Karidu obtained 
final emancipation. 

"Who Marisha was of old I will also relate to you, as the recital of her 
meritorious acts will be beneficial to you. She was the widow of a prince, and 
left childless at her husband's death: she therefore zealously worshipped Vishnu, 
who, being gratified by her adoration, appeared to her, and desired her to 
demand a boon; on which she revealed to him the wishes of her heart. 'I have 
been a widow, lord,' she exclaimed, 'even from my infancy, and my birth has 
been in vain: unfortunate have I been, and of little use, oh sovereign of the 
world. Now therefore I pray thee that in succeeding births I may have 
honourable husbands, and a son equal to a patriarch amongst men: may I be 
possessed of affluence and beauty: may I he pleasing in the sight of all: and may 
I be born out of the ordinary course. Grant these prayers, oh thou who art 
propitious to the devout.' Hrishikesa, the god of gods, the supreme giver of all 
blessings, thus prayed to, raised her from her prostrate attitude, and said, 'In 
another life you shall have ten husbands of mighty prowess, and renowned for 
glorious acts; and you shall have a son magnanimous and valiant, distinguished 
by the rank of a patriarch, from whom the various races of men shall multiply, 
and by whose posterity the universe shall be filled. You, virtuous lady, shall be of 
marvellous birth, and you shall be endowed with grace and loveliness, delighting 
the hearts of men.' Thus having spoken, the deity disappeared, and the princess 
was accordingly afterwards born as Marisha, who is given to you for a wife." 

Soma having concluded, the Prachetasas took Marisha, as he had enjoined them, 
righteously to wife, relinquishing their indignation against the trees: and upon 
her they begot the eminent patriarch Daksha, who had (in a former life) been 
born as the son of Brahma. This great sage, for the furtherance of creation, and 
the increase of mankind, created progeny. Obeying the command of Brahma, he 
made movable and immovable things, bipeds and quadrupeds; and subsequently, 



by his will, gave birth to females, ten of whom he bestowed on Dharma, thirteen 
on Kasyapa, and twenty-seven, who regulate the course of time, on the moon. Of 
these, the gods, the Titans, the snake-gods, cattle, and birds, the singers and 
dancers of the courts of heaven, the spirits of evil, and other beings, were born. 
From that period forwards living creatures were engendered by sexual 
intercourse: before the time of Daksha they were variously propagated, by the 
will, by sight, by touch, and by the influence of religious austerities practised by 
devout sages and holy saints. 

MAITREYA.—Daksha, as I have formerly heard, was born from the right thumb 
of Brahma: tell me, great Muni, how he was regenerate as the son of the 
Prachetasas. Considerable perplexity also arises in my mind, how he, who, as the 
son of Marisha, was the grandson of Soma, could be also his father-in-law. 

PARASARA.—Birth and death are constant in all creatures: Rishis and sages, 
possessing divine vision, are not perplexed by this. Daksha and the other 
eminent Munis are present in every age, and in the interval of destruction cease 
to be of this the wise man entertains no doubt. Amongst them of old there was 
neither senior nor junior; rigorous penance and acquired power were the sole 
causes of any difference of degree amongst these more than human beings. 

MAITREYA.—Narrate to me, venerable Brahman, at length, the birth of the 
gods, Titans, Gandharbas, serpents, and goblins. 

PARASARA.—In what manner Daksha created living creatures, as commanded 
by Brahma, you shall hear. In the first place he willed into existence the deities, 
the Rishis, the quiristers of heaven, the Titans, and the snake-gods. Finding that 
his will-born progeny did not multiply themselves, he determined, in order to 
secure their increase, to establish sexual intercourse as the means of 
multiplication. For this purpose he espoused Asikni, the daughter of the patriarch 
Viraria, a damsel addicted to devout practices, the eminent supportress of the 
world. By her the great father of mankind begot five thousand mighty sons, 
through whom he expected the world should be peopled. Narada, the divine 
Rishi, observing them desirous to multiply posterity, approached them, and 
addressed them in a friendly tone: "Illustrious Haryaswas, it is evident that your 
intention is to beget posterity; but first consider this: why should you, who, like 
fools, know not the middle, the height, and depth of the world, propagate 



offspring? When your intellect is no more obstructed by interval, height, or 
depth, then how, fools, shall ye not all behold the term of the universe?" Having 
heard the words of Narada, the sons of Daksha dispersed themselves through the 
regions, and to the present day have not returned; as rivers that lose themselves 
in the ocean come back no more. 

The Haryaswas having disappeared, the patriarch Daksha begot by the daughter 
of Virana a thousand other sons. They, who were named Savalaswas, were 
desirous of engendering posterity, but were dissuaded by Narada in a similar 
manner. They said to one another, "What the Muni has observed is perfectly just. 
We must follow the path that our brothers have travelled, and when we have 
ascertained the extent of the universe, we will multiply our race." Accordingly 
they scattered themselves through the regions, and, like rivers flowing into the 
sea, they returned not again. Henceforth brother seeking for brother disappears, 
through ignorance of the products of the first principle of things. Daksha the 
patriarch, on finding that all these his sons had vanished, was incensed, and 
denounced an imprecation upon Narada. 

Then, Maitreya, the wise patriarch, it is handed down to us, being anxious to 
people the world, created sixty daughters of the daughter of Virana ten of whom 
he gave to Dharma, thirteen to Kasyapa, and twenty-seven to Soma, four to 
Arishtanemi, two to Bahuputra, two to Angiras, and two to Krisaswa. I will tell 

r 

you their names. Arundhati, Vasu, Yami, Lamba, Bhanu, Mamtwati, Sankalpa, 
Muhurtta, Sadhya, and Viswa were the ten wives of Dharma, and bore him the 
following progeny. The sons of Viswa were the Viswadevas and the Sadhyas, 
those of Sadhya. The Maruts, or winds, were the children of Marutwati; the 
Vasus, of Vasu. The Bhanus (or suns) of Bhanu; and the deities presiding over 
moments, of Muhurtta. Ghosha was the son of Lamba (an arc of the heavens); 
Nagavithi (the milky way), the daughter of Yami (night). The divisions of the 

r 

earth were born of Arundhati; and Sankalpa (pious purpose), the soul of all, was 
the son of Sankalpa. The deities called Vasus, because, preceded by fire, they 
abound in splendour and might, are severally named Apa, Dhruva, Soma, Dhava 
(fire), Anila (wind), Anala (fire), Pratyusha (day-break), and Prabhasa (light). 

r r r 

The four sons of Apa were Vaitandya, Srama (weariness), Sranta (fatigue), and 
Dhur (burthen). Kala (time), the cherisher of the world, was the son of Dhruva. 
The son of Soma was Varchas (light), who was the father of Varchaswi 
(radiance). Dhava had, by his wife Manohara (loveliness), Dravina, 



Hutahavyavaha, Sisira, Prana, and Ramaria. The two sons of Anila (wind), by his 
wife Siva, were Manojava (swift as thought) and Avijnatagati (untraceable 
motion). The son of Agni (fire), Kumara, was born in a clump of Sara reeds: his 
sons were Sakha, Visakha, Naigameya, and Prishthaja. The offspring of the 
Krittikas was named Kartikeya. The son of Pratyusha was the Rishi named 
Devala, who had two philosophic and intelligent sons. The sister of Vachaspati, 
lovely and virtuous, Yogasiddha, who pervades the wholes world without being 
devoted to it, was the wife of Prabhasa, the eighth of the Vasus, and bore to him 
the patriarch Viswakarma, the author of a thousand arts, the mechanist of the 
gods, the fabricator of all ornaments, the chief of artists, the constructor of the 
self-moving chariots of the deities, and by whose skill men obtain subsistence. 
Ajaikapad, Ahirvradhna, and the wise Rudra Twashtri, were born; and the self- 
born son of Twashtri was also the celebrated Viswarupa. There are eleven well- 
known Rudras, lords of the three worlds, or Hara, Bahurupa, Tryambaka, 
Aparajita, Vrishakapi, Sambhu, Kaparddi, Raivata, Mrigavyadha, Sarva, and 
Kapalibut there are a hundred appellations of the immeasurably mighty Rudras . 

The daughters of Daksha who were married to Kasyapa were Aditi, Diti, Danu, 
Arishta, Surasa, Surabhi, Vinata, Tamra, Krodhavasa, Ida, Khasa, Kadru, and 
Muni whose progeny I will describe to you. There were twelve celebrated deities 
in a former Manwantara, called Tushitas, who, upon the approach of the present 
period, or in the reign of the last Manu, Chakshusha, assembled, and said to one 
another, "Come, let us quickly enter into the womb of Aditi, that we may be born 
in the next Manwantara, for thereby we shall again enjoy the rank of gods:" and 
accordingly they were born the sons of Kasyapa, the son of Marichi, by Aditi, 
the daughter of Daksha; thence named the twelve Adityas; whose appellations 

r r r 

were respectively, Vishnu, Sakra, Aryaman, Dhuti, Twashtri, Pushan, Vivaswat, 
Savitri, Mitra, Varuria, Ansa, and Bhaga. These, who in the Chakshusha 
Manwantara were the gods called Tushitas, were called the twelve Adityas in the 
Manwantara of Vaivaswata. 

The twenty-seven daughters of the patriarch who became the virtuous wives of 
the moon were all known as the nymphs of the lunar constellations, which were 
called by their names, and had children who were brilliant through their great 
splendour. The wives of Arishtanemi bore him sixteen children. The daughters of 
Bahuputra were the four lightnings. The excellent Pratyangirasa Richas were the 
children of Angiras, descended from the holy sage: and the deified weapons of 



the gods were the progeny of Krisaswa. 

These classes of thirty-three divinities are born again at the end of a thousand 
ages, according to their own pleasure; and their appearance and disappearance is 
here spoken of as birth and death: but, Maitreya, these divine personages exist 
age after age in the same manner as the sun sets and rises again. 

Sinka, the wife of Viprachitti. Hiranyakasipu was the father of four mighty sons, 
Anuhlada, Hlada, the wise Prahlada, and the heroic Sanhlada, the augmentor of 
the Daitya race. Amongst these, the illustrious Prahlada, looking on all things 
with indifference, devoted his whole faith to Janarddana. The flames that were 
lighted by the king of the Daityas consumed not him, in whose heart Vasudeva 
was cherished; and all the earth trembled when, bound with bonds, he moved 
amidst the waters of the ocean. His firm body, fortified by a mind engrossed by 
Achyuta, was unwounded by the weapons hurled on him by order of the Daitya 
monarch; and the serpents sent to destroy him breathed their venomous flames 
upon him in vain. Overwhelmed with rocks, he yet remained unhurt; for he 
never forgot Vishnu, and the recollection of the deity was his armour of proof. 
Hurled from on high by the king of the Daityas, residing in Swerga, earth 
received him unharmed. The wind sent into his body to wither him up was itself 
annihilated by him, in whom Madhusudana was present. The fierce elephants of 
the spheres broke their tusks, and vailed their pride, against the firm breast 
which the lord of the Daityas had ordered them to assault. The ministrant priests 
of the monarch were baffled in all their rites for the destruction of one so steadily 
attached to Govinda: and the thousand delusions of the fraudulent Samvara, 
counteracted by the discus of Krishna, were practised without success. The 
deadly poison administered by his father's officers he partook of unhesitatingly, 
and without its working any visible change; for he looked upon the world with 
mind undisturbed, and, full of benignity, regarded all things with equal affection, 
and as identical with himself. He was righteous; an inexhaustible mine of purity 
and truth; and an unfailing model for all pious men. 


Footnotes 


01. Or, 'immersed in the six Urmis'; explained hunger, thirst, sorrow, 
stupefaction, decay, and death. 

02. There is some confusion here in regard to the person addressed, but the 
context shews that the insertion of Maitreya's name is an inadvertence, and 
that the passage is a continuation of Soma's speech to the Prachetasas. 

03. The phrase is 'made up of the farther boundary of Brahma;' implying either 
'comprehending the supreme, or Brahma, and transcendental wisdom, Para;' 
or, consisting of the farthest limits (Para) or truths of the Vedas or Brahma;' 
that is, being the essence of the Vedanta philosophy. The hymn that follows is 
in fact a mantra or mystical prayer, commencing with the reiteration of the 
word Para and Para; as, ###. Para means 'supreme, infinite; and Para, 'the 
farther bank or limit,' the point that is to be attained by crossing a river or sea, 
or figuratively the world or existence. Vishnu, then, is Para, that which 
nothing surpasses; and Para, the end or object of existence: he is Apara para, 
the farthest bound of that which is illimitable, or space and time: he is Param 
parebhyah, above or beyond the highest, being beyond or superior to all the 
elements: he is Paramartha rupi, or identical with final truth, or knowledge of 
soul: he is Brahma para, the object or essence of spiritual wisdom. 
Paraparabhuta is said to imply the farther limit (Para) of rudimental matter 
(Para). He is Para, or chief Paranam, of those objects which are beyond the 
senses: and he is Parapara, or the boundary of boundaries; that is, he is the 
comprehensive in-vesture of, and exterior to, those limits by which soul is 
confined; he is free from all incumbrance or impediment. The passage may be 
interpreted in different ways, according to the ingenuity with which the riddle 
is read. 

04. This part of the legend is peculiar to our text, and the whole story of 
Marisha's birth is nowhere else so fully detailed. The penance of the 
Prachetasas, and its consequences, are related in the Agni, Bhagavata, Matsya, 
Padma, Vayu, and Brahma Purarias, and allusion is briefly made to Marisha's 
birth. Her origin from Kandu and Pramlocha is narrated in a different place in 
the Brahma Purana, where the austerities of Kandu, and the necessity for their 
interruption, are described. The story, from that authority, was translated by 
the late Professor Chezy, and is published in the first number of the Journal 
Asiatique. 



05. The second birth of Daksha, and his share in the peopling of the earth, is 
narrated in most of the Puranas in a similar manner. It is perhaps the original 
legend, for Daksha seems to be an irregular adjunct to the Prajapatis, or mind- 
born sons of Brahma and the allegorical nature of his posterity in that 
character intimates a more recent origin. Nor does that series of descendants 
apparently occur in the Mahabharata, although the existence of two Dakshas is 
especially remarked there (Moksha Dh.). In the Adi Parva, which seems to be 
the freest from subsequent improvements, the Daksha noticed is the son of the 
Prachetasas. The incompatibility of the two accounts is reconciled by referring 
the two Dakshas to different Manwantaras. The Daksha who proceeded from 
Brahma as a Prajapati being born in the first, or Swayambhuva, and the son of 
the Prachetasas in the Chakshusha Manwantara. The latter however, as 
descended from Uttanapada, should belong to the first period also. It is 
evident that great confusion has been made by the Puranas in Daksha's history. 

06. That is, they are the Nakshatras, or lunar asterisms. 

07. 'They are removed', which the commentator explains by 'are absorbed, as 
if they were fast asleep;' but in every age or Yuga, according to the text—in 
every Manwantara, according to the comment—the Rishis reappear, the 
circumstances of their origin only being varied. Daksha therefore, as remarked 
in the preceding note, is the son of Brahma in one period, the son of the 
Prachetasas in another. So Soma, in the Swayambhuva Manwantara, was born 
as the son of Atri; in the Chakshusha, he was produced by churning the ocean. 
The words of our text occur in the Hari Vansa, with an unimportant variation: 
'Birth and obstruction are constant in all beings, but Rishis and those men who 
are wise are not perplexed by this;' that is, not, as rendered above, by the 
alternation of life and death; but, according to the commentator on the Hari 
Vansa, by a very different matter, the prohibition of unlawful marriages. 
Utpatti, 'birth of progeny,' is the result of their will; Nirodha, 'obstruction,' is 
the law prohibiting the intermarriage of persons connected by the offering of 
the funeral cake; to which Rishis and sages are not subject, either from their 
matrimonial unions being merely platonic, or from the bad example set by 
Brahma, who, according to the Vedas, approached his own daughter; we have 
already had occasion to advert to. The explanation of the text, however, given 
by the commentator appears forced, and less natural than the interpretation 
preferred above. 


08. This is the usual account of Daksha's marriage, and is that of the 
Mahabharata, Adi P. and of the Brahma Purana, which the Hari Vansa, in the 
first part, repeats. In another portion, the Pushkara Mahatmya, however, 
Daksha, it is said, converts half himself into a female, by whom he begets the 
daughters presently to be noticed: ###. This seems to be merely a new edition 
of an old story. 

09. The commentator explains it to mean the origin, duration, and termination 
of subtile rudimental body; but the Padma and Linga P. distinctly express it, 
'the extent of the earth.' 

10. Narada's interference, and the fruitless generation of the first progeny of 
Daksha, is an old legend. The Mahabharata notices only one set of sons, who, 
it is said, obtained Moksha, or liberation, through Nareda's teaching them the 
Sankhya philosophy. The Brahma, Matsya, Vayu, Linga, Padma, Agni, and 
Bhagavata Puranas tell the story much as in the text, and not unfrequently in 
the same words. In general they merely refer to the imprecation denounced 
upon Narada, as above. The Bhagavata specifies the imprecation to be 
perpetual peripateticism. Daksha says to him, 'There shall not be a resting- 
place for thee in all these regions.' The Kurma repeats the imprecation merely 
to the effect that Narada shall perish, and gives no legend. In the Brahma 
Vaivartta, Narada is cursed by Brahma, on a similar occasion, to become the 
chief of the Gandharbas, whence his musical propensities: but the Bhagavata, 
VI. 7, has the reverse of this legend, and makes him first a Gandharba, then a 
Sudra, then the son of Brahma. The Brahma P., and after it the Hari Vansa and 
the Vayu P., have a different and not very intelligible story. Daksha, being 
about to pronounce an imprecation upon Narada, was appeased by Brahma 
and the Rishis, and it was agreed between them that Narada should be again 
born, as the son of Kasyapa, by one of Daksha's daughters. This seems to be 
the gist of the legend, but it is very confusedly told. The version of the 
Brahma P., which is the same as that of Hari Vansa, may be thus rendered: 
"The smooth-speaking Narada addressed the sons of Daksha for their 
destruction and his own; for the Muni Kasyapa begot him as a son, who was 
the son of Brahma, on the daughter of Daksha, through fear of the latter's 

r 

imprecation. He was formerly the son of Parameshthi (Brahma), and the 
excellent sage Kasyapa next begot him, as if he were his father, on Asikni, the 



daughter of Virana. Whilst he was engaged in beguiling the sons of the 
patriarch, Daksha, of resistless power, determined on his destruction; but he 
was solicited by Brahma, in the presence of the great sages, and it was agreed 
between them that Narada, the son of Brahma, should be born of a daughter of 

r 

Daksha. Consequently Daksha gave his daughter to Parameshthi, and by her 
was Narada born." Now several difficulties occur here. Asikni is the wife, not 
the daughter, of Daksha; but this may be a blunder of the compiler, for in the 
parallel passage of the Vayu no name occurs. In the next place, who is this 
daughter? for, as we shall see, the progeny of all Daksha's daughters are fully 
detailed, and in no authority consulted is Narada mentioned as the son of 
either of them, or as the son of Kasyapa. Daksha, too, gives his daughter, not 
to Kasyapa, but to Parameshthi, or Brahma. The commentator on the Hari 
Vansa solves this by saying he gives her to Brahma for Kasyapa. The same 
bargain is noticed in the Vayu, but Narada is also said there to be adopted by 
Kasyapa. Again, however, it gives Daksha's imprecation in the same words as 
the Hari Vansa; a passage, by the way, omitted in the Brahma: 'Narada, perish 
(in your present form), and take up your abode in the womb.' Whatever may 
be the original of this legend, it is evidently imperfectly given by the 
authorities here cited. The French translation of the passage in the Hari Vansa 
can scarcely be admitted as correct: assuredly is not 'le Devarchi Dakcha, 
epoux d”Asikni, fille de Virana, fut Faieul de cet illustri mouni ainsi 
regenere.' ### is more consistently said by the commentator to mean Kasyapa. 
The Vayu P. in another part, a description of the different orders of Rishis, 
states that the Devarshis Parvata and Nareda were sons of Kasyapa: In the 
account of Karttavirya, in the Brahma P. and Hari Vansa, Narada is introduced 
as a Gandharba, the son of Varidasa; being the same, according to the 
commentator on the latter, as the Gandharba elsewhere called Upavarhana. 

11. The prior specification was fifty. The Mahabharata, Adi and, again, 
Moksha Dharma, has the same number. The Bhagavata, Kurma, Padma, 
Linga, and Vayu P. state sixty. The former is perhaps the original, as the 
fullest and most consistent details relate to them and their posterity. 

12. This is the usual list of Dharma's wives. The Bhagavata substitutes Kakud 
for Arundhati. The Padma P., Matsya P., and Hari Vansa contain two different 
account of Daksha's descendants: the first agrees with our text; the second, 
which is supposed to occur in the Padma Kalpa, is somewhat varied, 



particularly as to the wives of Dharma, who are said to be five. The 
nomenclature varies, or, 


Padma P. 

Hari Vansa. 

Matsya. 

Lakshmi 

Lakshmi 

Lakshmi 

Saraswati 

Kirtti 

Saraswati 

Ganga 

Sadhya 

Sadhya 

Viswesa 

Viswa 

Viswesa 

Savitri 

Marutwati 

Urjjaswati. 


There is evident inaccuracy in all the copies, and the names may in some 
instances be erroneous. From the succeeding enumeration of their 
descendants, it appears that Kama was the son of Lakshmi; the Sadhyas, of 
Sadhya; the Viswadevas, of Viswa; the Maruts, of Marutwati; and the Vasus, 
of Devi, who may be either the Saraswati or Savitri of the previous 
enumeration. 

13. The Viswadevas are a class of gods to whom sacrifices should be offered 
daily. Manu, III. 121. They are named in some of the Puranas, as the Vayu and 
Matsya: the former specifying ten; the latter, twelve. 

14. The Sadhyas, according to the Vayu, are the personified rites and prayers 
of the Vedas, born of the metres, and partakers of the sacrifices. The same 
work names twelve, which are all names of sacrifices and formulae, as Darsa, 
Paurnamasa, Vrihadaswa, Rathantara, &c. The Matsya P., Padma P., and Hari 
V. have a different set of seventeen appellations, apparently of arbitrary 
selection, as Bhava, Prabhava, Isa, Arum, &c. 

15. Or, according to the Padma P., because they are always present in light, or 
luminous irradiation. 

16. The Vayu supplies their names, Kshamavartta (patient) and Manaswin 
(wise). 

17. The passage is, ### Whose sons they are does not appear; the object being, 
according to the comment, to specify only the eleven divisions or 

























modifications of the youngest Rudra, Twashta.' We have, however, an unusual 
variety of reading here in two copies of the comment: 'The eleven Rudras, in 
whom the family of Twashtri (a synonyme, it may be observed, sometimes of 
Viswakarma) is included, were born. The enumeration of the Rudras ends with 
Aparajita, of whom Tryambaka is the epithet.' Accordingly the three last 
names in all the other copies of the text are omitted in these two; their places 
being supplied by the three first, two of whom are always named in the lists of 
the Rudras. According to the Vayu and Brahma R the Rudras are the children 
of Kasyapa by Surabhi: the Bhagavata makes them the progeny of Bhuta and 
Sarupa: the Matsya, Padma, and Hari V., in the second series, the offspring of 
Surabhi by Brahma. The names in three of the Pauranic authorities run thus: 


Vayu. 

Matsya. 

Bhagavata. 

Ajaikapad 

Ajaikapad 

Ajaikapad 

Ahirvradhna 

Ahirvradhna 

Ahirvradhna 

Hara 

Hama 

Ugra 

Nirrita 

Nirritti 

Bhima 

Iswara 

Pingala 

Varna 

Bhuvana 

Dahana 

Mahan 

Angaraka 

Aparajita 

Bahurupa 

Arddhaketu 

Mrigavyadha 

Vrishakapi 

Mrityu 

Senani 

Aja 

Sarpa 

Sajja 

Bhava 

Kapali 

Kapali 

Raivata. 


The Brahma or Hari V., the Padma, the Linga, &c. have other varieties; and 

r 

the Lexicons have a different reading from all, as in that of Jatadhara they are 
Ajaikapad, Ahivradhna, Virupaksha, Sureswara, Jayanta, Bahurupaka, 
Tryambaka, Aparajita, Vaivaswata, Savitra, and Hara. The variety seems to 
proceed from the writers applying to the Rudras, as they may legitimately do, 
different appellations of the common prototype, or synonymes of Rudra or 
Siva, selected at will from his thousand and eight names, according to the 
Linga P. 





































18. The posterity of Daksha's daughters by Dharma are clearly allegorical 
personifications chiefly of two classes, one consisting of astronomical 
phenomena, and the other of portions or subjects of the ritual of the Vedas. 

19. There is some, though not much, variation in these names in different 
Puranas. The Bhagavata has Sarama, Kashtha, and Timi, the parents severally 
of canine animals, beasts with uncloven hoofs, and fishes, in place of Vinata, 
Khasa, and Kadru; disposing of the first and last differently. The Vayu has 
Prava in place of Arishta, and Anayush or Danayush for Surasa. The Padma P., 
second series, substitutes Kala, Anayush, Sinhika, Pisacha, Vach for Arishta, 
Surasa, Surabhi, Tamra, and Muni; and omits Ida and Khasa. In the Uttara 
Kharida of the same, Kasyapa's wives are said to be but four, Aditi, Diti, 
Kadru, and Vinata. 

20. In the sixth reign, or that of Chakshusha Manu, according to the text; but 
in book III. ch. 1. the Tushitas are the gods of the second or Swarochisha 
Manwantara. The Vayu has a much more complete legend than any other Pura 
on this subject. In the beginning of the Kalpa twelve gods, named Jayas, were 
created by Brahma, as his deputies and assistants in the creation. They, lost in 
meditation, neglected his commands; on which he cursed them to be 
repeatedly born in each Manwantara till the seventh. They were accordingly, 
in the several successive Manwantaras, Ajitas, Tushitas, Satyas, Haris, 
Vaikunthas, Sadhyas, and Adityas. Our authority and some others, as the 
Brahma, have apparently intended to refer to this account, but have confused 
the order of the series. 

21. The Puranas that contain this genealogy agree tolerably well in these 
names. The Bhagavata adds many details regarding some of the Adityas and 
their descendants. 

22. The Nakshatra Yoginis, or chief stars of the lunar mansions, or asterisms 
in the moon's path. 

23. None of the authorities are more specific on the subject of Arishtanemis' 
progeny. In the Mahabharata this is said to be another name of Kasyapa. The 
Bhagavata substitutes Tarksha for this personage, said by the commentator to 
be likewise another name of Kasyapa. His wives are, Kadru, Vinata, Patangi, 


and Yamini, mothers of snakes, birds, grasshoppers, and locusts. 

24. Enumerated in astrological works as brown, red, yellow, and white; 
portending severally wind, heat, rain, famine. 

25. The Richas, or verses, thirty-five in number, addressed to presiding 
divinities, denominated Pratyangirasas. The Bhagavata calls the wives of 
Anginas, Swadha and Sati, and makes them the mothers of the Pitris and the 
Atharvan Veda severally. 

26. The Sastra devatas, 'gods of the divine weapons;' a hundred are 
enumerated in the Ramayana, and they are there termed the sons of Krisaswa 
by Jaya and Vijaya, daughters of the Prajapati; that is, of Daksha. The 
Bhagavata terms the two wives of Krisaswa, Archish (flame) and Dhishana; 
the former is the mother of Dhumaketu (comet); the latter, of four sages, 
Devala, Vedasiras, Vayuria, and Manu. The allegorical origin of the weapons 
is undoubtedly the more ancient. 

27. This number is founded upon a text of the Vedas, which to the eight Vasus, 
eleven Rudras, and twelve Adityas, adds Prajapati, either Brahma or Daksha, 
and Vashatkara, 'deified oblation.' They have the epithet Chhandaja, as born in 
different Manwantaras, of their own will. 

28. The Puranas generally concur in this genealogy, reading sometimes 
Anuhrada, Hrada, &c. for Anuhlada and the rest. Although placed second in 
the order of Kasyapa's descendants, the Daityas are in fact the elder branch. 
Thus the Mahabharata, Moksha Dherma, calls Diti the senior wife of 
Kasyapa: and the Vayu terms Hiranyakasipu and Hiranyaksha the eldest of all 
the sons of that patriarch. "Titan and his enormous brood" were "heaven's first 
born." 




16. Chapter 


Inquiries of Maitreya respecting the history of Prahlada. 

MAITREYA.—Venerable Muni, you have described to me the races of human 
beings, and the eternal Vishnu, the cause of this world; but who was this mighty 
Prahlada, of whom you have last spoken; whom fire could not burn; who died 
not, when pierced by weapons; at whose presence in the waters earth trembled, 
shaken by his movements, even though in bonds; and who, overwhelmed with 
rocks, remained unhurt. I am desirous to hear an account of the unequalled might 
of that sage worshipper of Vishnu, to whose marvellous history you have 
alluded. Why was he assailed by the weapons of the sons of Diti? why was so 
righteous a person thrown into the sea? wherefore was he overwhelmed with 
rocks? why bitten by venomous snakes? why hurled from the mountain crest? 
why cast into the flames? why was he made a mark for the tusks of the elephants 
of the spheres? wherefore was the blast of death directed against him by the 
enemies of the gods? why did the priests of the Daityas practise ceremonies for 
his destruction? why were the thousand illusions of Samvara exercised upon 
him? and for what purpose was deadly poison administered to him by the 
servants of the king, but which was innocuous as food to his sagacious son? All 
this I am anxious to hear: the history of the magnanimous Prahlada; a legend of 
great marvels. Not that it is a wonder that he should have been uninjured by the 
Daityas; for who can injure the man that fixes his whole heart on Vishnu? but it 
is strange that such inveterate hatred should have been shewn, by his own kin, to 
one so virtuous, so unweariedly occupied in worshipping Vishnu. You can 
explain to me for what reason the sons of Diti offered violence to one so pious, 
so illustrious, so attached to Vishnu, so free from guile. Generous enemies wage 
no war with such as he was, full of sanctity and every excellence; how should his 
own father thus behave towards him? Tell me therefore, most illustrious Muni, 
the whole story in detail: I wish to hear the entire narrative of the sovereign of 
the Daitya race. 




17. Chapter 


Legend of Prahlada. Hirariyakasipu, the sovereign of the universe: the gods 
dispersed or in servitude to him: Prahlada, his son, remains devoted to Vishnu: 
questioned by his father, he praises Vishnu: Hirariyakasipu orders him to be put 
to death, but in vain: his repeated deliverance: he teaches his companions to 
adore Vishnu.? 

PARASARA.—Listen, Maitreya, to the story of the wise and magnanimous 
Prahlada, whose adventures are ever interesting and instructive. Hirariyakasipu, 
the son of Diti, had formerly brought the three worlds under his authority, 
confiding in a boon bestowed upon him by Brahma. He had usurped the 
sovereignty of Indra, and exercised of himself the functions of the sun, of air, of 
the lord of waters, of fire, and of the moon. He himself was the god of riches; he 
was the judge of the dead; and he appropriated to himself, without reserve, all 
that was offered in sacrifice to the gods. The deities therefore, flying from their 
seats in heaven, wandered, through fear of the Daitya, upon the earth, disguised 
in mortal shapes. Having conquered the three worlds, he was inflated with pride, 
and, eulogized by the Gandharbas, enjoyed whatever he desired. The 
Gandharbas, the Siddhas, and the snake-gods all attended upon the mighty 
Hirariyakasipu, as he sat at the banquet. The Siddhas delighted stood before him, 
some playing on musical instruments, some singing songs in his praise, and 
others shouting cries of victory; whilst the nymphs of heaven danced gracefully 
in the crystal palace, where the Asura with pleasure quaffed the inebriating cup. 

The illustrious son of the Daitya king, Prahlada, being yet a boy, resided in the 
dwelling of his preceptor, where he read such writings as are studied in early 
years. On one occasion he came, accompanied by his teacher, to the court of his 
father, and bowed before his feet as he was drinking. Hirariyakasipu desired his 
prostrate son to rise, and said to him, "Repeat, boy, in substance, and agreeably, 
what during the period of your studies you have acquired." "Hear, sire," replied 
Prahlada, "what in obedience to your commands I will repeat, the substance of 
all I have learned: listen attentively to that which wholly occupies my thoughts. I 
have learned to adore him who is without beginning, middle, or end, increase or 
diminution; the imperishable lord of the world, the universal cause of causes." 


On hearing these words, the sovereign of the Daityas, his eyes red with wrath, 
and lip swollen with indignation, turned to the preceptor of his son, and said, 
"Vile Brahman, what is this preposterous commendation of my foe, that, in 
disrespect to me, you have taught this boy to utter?" "King of the Daityas," 
replied the Guru, "it is not worthy of you to give way to passion: that which your 
son has uttered, he has not been taught by me." "By whom then," said 
Hiranyakasipu to the lad, "by whom has this lesson, boy, been taught you? your 
teacher denies that it proceeds from him." "Vishnu, father," answered Prahlada, 
"is the instructor of the whole world: what else should any one teach or learn, 
save him the supreme spirit?" "Blockhead," exclaimed the king, "who is this 
Vishnu, whose name you thus reiterate so impertinently before me, who am the 
sovereign of the three worlds?" "The glory of Vishnu," replied Prahlada, "is to be 
meditated upon by the devout; it cannot be described: he is the supreme lord, 
who is all things, and from whom all things proceed." To this the king rejoined, 
"Are you desirous of death, fool, that you give the title of supreme lord to any 
one whilst I survive?" "Vishnu, who is Brahma," said Prahlada, "is the creator 
and protector, not of me alone, but of all human beings, and even, father, of you: 
he is the supreme lord of all. Why should you, sire, be offended?" Hiranyakasipu 
then exclaimed, "What evil spirit has entered into the breast of this silly boy, that 
thus, like one possessed, he utters such profanity?" "Not into my heart alone," 
said Prahlada, "has Vishnu entered, but he pervades all the regions of the 
universe, and by his omnipresence influences the conduct of all beings, mine, 
fattier, and thine." "Away with the wretch!" cried the king; "take him to his 
preceptor's mansion. By whom could he have been instigated to repeat the lying 
praises of my foe?" 

According to the commands of his father, Prahlada was conducted by the 
Daityas back to the house of his Guru; where, assiduous in attendance on his 
preceptor, he constantly improved in wisdom. After a considerable time had 
elapsed, the sovereign of the Asuras sent for him again; and on his arrival in his 
presence, desired him to recite some poetical composition. Prahlada immediately 
began, "May he from whom matter and soul originate, from whom all that 
moves or is unconscious proceeds, he who is the cause of all this creation, 
Vishnu, be favourable unto us!" On hearing which, Hiranyakasipu exclaimed, 
"Kill the wretch! he is not fit to live, who is a traitor to his friends, a burning 
brand to his own race!" and his attendants, obedient to his orders, snatched up 
their weapons, and rushed in crowds upon Prahlada, to destroy him. The prince 



calmly looked upon them, and said, "Daityas, as truly as Vishnu is present in 
your weapons and in my body, so truly shall those weapons fail to harm me:" 
and accordingly, although struck heavily and repeatedly by hundreds of the 
Daityas, the prince felt not the least pain, and his strength was ever renewed. His 
father then endeavoured to persuade him to refrain from glorifying his enemy, 
and promised him immunity if the would not be so foolish as to persevere but 
Prahlada replied, that he felt no fear as long as his immortal guardian against all 
dangers was present in his mind, the recollection of whom was alone sufficient 
to dissipate all the perils consequent upon birth or human infirmities. 

Hiranyakasipu, highly exasperated, commanded the serpents to fall upon his 
disobedient and insane son, and bite him to death with their envenomed fangs: 
and thereupon the great snakes Kuhaka, Takshaka, and Andhaka, charged with 
fatal poison, bit the prince in every part of his body; but he, with thoughts 
immovably fixed on Krishna, felt no pain from their wounds, being immersed in 
rapturous recollections of that divinity. Then the snakes cried to the king, and 
said, "Our fangs are broken; our jewelled crests are burst; there is fever in our, 
hoods, and fear in our hearts; but the skin of the youth is still unscathed: have 
recourse, monarch of the Daityas, to some other expedient." "Ho, elephants of 
the skies!" exclaimed the demon; "unite your tusks, and destroy this deserter 
from his father, and conspirer with my foes. It is thus that often our progeny are 
our destruction, as fire consumes the wood from which it springs." The young 
prince was then assailed by the elephants of the skies, as vast as mountain peaks; 
cast down upon the earth, and trampled on, and gored by their tusks: but he 
continued to call to mind Govinda, and the tusks of the elephants were blunted 
against his breast. "Behold," he said to his father, "the tusks of the elephants, as 
hard as adamant, are blunted; but this is not by any strength of mine: calling 
upon Janarddana is my defence against such fearful affliction." 

Then said the king to his attendants, "Dismiss the elephants, and let fire consume 
him; and do thou, deity of the winds, blow up the fire, that this wicked wretch 
may be consumed." And the Danavas piled a mighty heap of wood around the 
prince, and kindled a fire, to burn him, as their master had commanded. But 
Prahlada cried, "Father, this fire, though blown up by the winds, burneth me not; 
and all around I behold the face of the skies, cool and fragrant, with beds of lotus 
flowers." 



Then the Brahmans who were the sons of Bhargava, illustrious priests, and 
reciters of the Sanaa-Veda, said to the king of the Daityas, "Sire, restrain your 
wrath against your own son. How should anger succeed in finding a place in 
heavenly mansions? As for this lad, we will be his instructors, and teach him 
obediently to labour for the destruction of your foes. Youth is the season, king, 
of many errors; and you should not therefore be relentlessly offended with a 
child. If he will not listen to us, and abandon the cause of Hari, we will adopt 
infallible measures to work his death." The king of the Daityas, thus solicited by 
the priests, commanded the prince to be liberated from the midst of the flames. 

Again established in the dwelling of his preceptor, Prahlada gave lessons himself 
to the sons of the demons, in the intervals of his leisure. "Sons of the offspring of 
Diti," he was accustomed to say to them, "hear from me the supreme truth; 
nothing else is fit to be regarded; nothing, else here is an object to be coveted. 
Birth, infancy, and youth are the portion of all creatures; and then succeeds 
gradual and inevitable decay, terminating with all beings, children of the 
Daityas, in death: this is manifestly visible to all; to you as it is to me. That the 
dead are born again, and that it cannot be otherwise, the sacred texts are warrant: 
but production cannot be without a material cause; and as long as conception and 
parturition are the material causes of repeated birth, so long, be sure, is pain 
inseparable from every period of existence. The simpleton, in his inexperience, 
fancies that the alleviation of hunger, thirst, cold, and the like is pleasure; but of 
a truth it is pain; for suffering gives delight to those whose vision is darkened by 
delusion, as fatigue would be enjoyment to limbs that are incapable of motion. 
This vile body is a compound of phlegm and other humours. Where are its 
beauty, grace, fragrance, or other estimable qualities? The fool that is fond of a 
body composed of flesh, blood, matter, ordure, urine, membrane, marrow, and 
bones, will be enamoured of hell. The agreeableness of fire is caused by cold; of 
water, by thirst; of food, by hunger: by other circumstances their contraries are 
equally agreeable. The child of the Daitya who takes to himself a wife introduces 
only so much misery into his bosom; for as many as are the cherished affections 
of a living creature, so many are the thorns of anxiety implanted in his heart; and 
he who has large possessions in his house is haunted, wherever he goes, with the 
apprehension that they may be lost or burnt or stolen. Thus there is great pain in 
being born: for the dying man there are the tortures of the judge of the deceased, 
and of passing again into 'the womb. If you conclude that there is little 
enjoyment in the embryo state, you must then admit that the world is made up of 



pain. Verily I say unto you, that in this ocean of the world, this sea of many 
sorrows, Vishnu is your only hope. If ye say, you know nothing of this; 'we are 
children; embodied spirit in bodies is eternal; birth, youth, decay, are the 
properties of the body, not of the soul.' But it is in this way that we deceive 
ourselves. I am yet a child; but it is my purpose to exert myself when I am a 
youth. I am yet a youth; but when I become old I will do what is needful for the 
good of my soul. I am now old, and all my duties are to be fulfilled. How shall I, 
now that my faculties fail me, do what was left undone when my strength was 
unimpaired?' In this manner do men, whilst their minds are distracted by sensual 
pleasures, ever propose, and never attain final beatitude: they die thirsting. 
Devoted in childhood to play, and in youth to pleasure, ignorant and impotent 
they find that old age is come upon them. Therefore even in childhood let the 
embodied soul acquire discriminative wisdom, and, independent of the 
conditions of infancy, youth, or age, strive incessantly to be freed. This, then, is 
what I declare unto you; and since you know that it is not untrue, do you, out of 
regard to me, call to your minds Vishnu, the liberator from all bondage. What 
difficulty is there in thinking upon him, who, when remembered, bestows 
prosperity; and by recalling whom to memory, day and night, all sin is cleansed 
away? Let all your thoughts and affections be fixed on him, who is present in all 
beings, and you shall laugh at every care. The whole world is suffering under a 
triple affliction. 'What wise man would feel hatred towards beings who are 
objects of compassion? If fortune be propitious to them, and I am unable to 
partake of the like enjoyments, yet wherefore should I cherish malignity towards 
those who are more prosperous than myself: I should rather sympathise with 
their happiness; for the suppression of malignant feelings is of itself a reward. If 
beings are hostile, and indulge in hatred, they are objects of pity to the wise, as 
encompassed by profound delusion. These are the reasons for repressing hate, 
which are adapted to the capacities of those who see the deity distinct from his 
creatures. Hear, briefly, what influences those who have approached the truth. 
This whole world is but a manifestation of Vishnu, who is identical with all 
things; and it is therefore to be regarded by the wise as not differing from, but as 
the same with themselves. Let us therefore lay aside the angry passions of our 
race, and so strive that we obtain that perfect, pure, and eternal happiness, which 
shall be beyond the power of the elements or their deities, of fire, of the sun, of 
the moon, of wind, of Indra, of the regent of the sea; which shall be unmolested 
by spirits of air or earth; by Yakshas, Daityas, or their chiefs; by the serpent-gods 
or monstrous demigods of Swerga; which shall be uninterrupted by men or 



beasts, or by the infirmities of human nature; by bodily sickness and disease, or 
hatred, envy, malice, passion, or desire; which nothing shall molest, and which 
every one who fixes his whole heart on Kesava shall enjoy. Verily I say unto 
you, that you shall have no satisfaction in various revolutions through this 
treacherous world, but that you will obtain placidity for ever by propitiating 
Vishnu, whose adoration is perfect calm. What here is difficult of attainment, 
when he is pleased? Wealth, pleasure, virtue, are things of little moment. 
Precious is the fruit that you shall gather, be assured, from the exhaustless store 
of the tree of true wisdom." 




Footnotes 

01. The boon, according to the Vayu Puraria, was, that he should not be slain 
by any created being: the Kurma adds, except by Vishnu. The Bhagavata 
has a similar boon as the Vayu, and therefore, says the commentator, 
Vishnu assumed the form of the Nrisinha, as being that of neither a man 
nor an animal. 

02. The Puranas teach constantly incompatible doctrines. According to this 
passage, the Supreme Being is not the inert cause of creation only, but 
exercises the functions of an active Providence. The commentator quotes 
a text of the Veda in support of this view: 'Universal soul entering into 
men, governs their conduct.' Incongruities, however, are as frequent in 
the Vedas as in the Puranas; but apparently the most ancient parts of the 
Hindu ritual recognised an active ruler in the Creator of the universe; the 
notion of abstract deity originating with the schools of philosophy. 

03. This is the purport of the sentence apparently, and is that which the 
comment in part confirms. Literally it is, 'A blow is the pleasure of those 
whose eyes are darkened by ignorance, whose limbs, exceedingly 
benumbed, desire pleasure by exercise: The commentator divides the 
sentence, however, and reads it, 'As fatigue would be like pleasure to 
paralyzed limbs; and a blow is enjoyment to those who are blinded by 
delusion; that is, by love; for to them a slap, or even a kick, from a 
mistress would be a favour.' It is not improbably an allusion to some such 
venerable pastime as blindman's buff. This interpretation, however, 


leaves the construction of the first half of the sentence imperfect, unless 
the nominative and verb apply to both portions. 

04. They are so far from being sources of pleasure in themselves, that, under 
different contrasts, they become sources of pain. Heat is agreeable in cold 
weather: cold is agreeable in hot weather; heat would then be 
disagreeable. Drink is pleasant to a thirsty man: thirst is agreeable to one 
who has drunk too much; and more drink would be painful. So of food, 
and of other contrasts. 

05. 'Divine knowledge is the province only of those who can separate soul 
from body; that is, who live independent of bodily infirmities and 
passions. We have not overcome corporeal vicissitudes, and have 
therefore no concern with such abstruse inquiries.' This is the 
commentator's explanation of the passage. 

06. Alluding, says the commentator, to the fable of a washerman, who, whilst 
washing his clothes in the Ganges, proposed daily to drink of its waters, 
but forgot his purpose in his occupation: or of a boy, who proposed the 
same as he pursued fish after fish, and never accomplished his intention, 
being engrossed by his sport: both died without drinking. 

07. The three kinds of affliction of the Sankhya philosophy: internal, as 
bodily or mental distress; external, as injuries from men, animals, &c.; 
and superhuman, or inflictions by gods or demons. See S. Karika, ver. 1. 

08. The construction of the text is elliptical and brief, but the sense is 
sufficiently clear. The order of the last pada is thus transposed by the 
commentator: 'Whence (from feeling pleasure) the abandonment of 
enmity is verily the consequence.' 

09. The original rather unpoetically specifies some of these, or fever, 
ophthalmia, dysentery, spleen, liver, &c. The whole of these defects are 
the individuals of the three species of pain alluded to before. 




18. Chapter 


Hiranyakasipu's reiterated attempts to destroy his son: their being always 

frustrated. 

THE Danavas, observing the conduct of Prahlada, reported it to the king, lest 
they should incur his displeasure. He sent for his cooks, and said to them, "My 
vile and unprincipled son is now teaching others his impious doctrines: be quick, 
and put an end to him. Let deadly poison be mixed up with all his viands, 
without his knowledge. Hesitate not, but destroy the wretch without delay." 
Accordingly they did so, and administered poison to the virtuous Prahlada, as his 
father had commanded them. Prahlada, repeating the name of the imperishable, 
ate and digested the food in which the deadly poison had been infused, and 
suffered no harm from it, either in body or mind, for it had been rendered 
innocuous by the name of the eternal. Beholding the strong poison digested, 
those who had prepared the food were filled with dismay, and hastened to the 
king, and fell down before him, and said, "King of the Daityas, the fearful 
poison given by us to your son has been digested by him along with his food, as 
if it were innocent. Hiranyakasipu, on hearing this, exclaimed, "Hasten, hasten, 
ministrant priests of the Daitya race! instantly perform the rites that will effect 
his destruction!" Then the priests went to Prahlada, and, having repeated the 
hymns of the Sama-Veda, said to him, as he respectfully hearkened, "Thou hast 
been born, prince, in the family of Brahma, celebrated in the three worlds, the 
son of Hiranyakasipu, the king of the Daityas; why shouldest thou acknowledge 
dependance upon the gods? why upon the eternal? Thy father is the stay of all 
the worlds, as thou thyself in turn shalt be. Desist, then, from celebrating the 
praises of an enemy; and remember, that of all venerable preceptors, a father is 
most venerable." Prahlada replied to them, "Illustrious Brahmans, it is true that 
the family of Marichi is renowned in the three worlds; this cannot be denied: and 
I also admit, what is equally indisputable, that my father is mighty over the 
universe. There is no error, not the least, in what you have said, 'that a father is 
the most venerable of all holy teachers:' he is a venerable instructor, no doubt, 
and is ever to be devoutly reverenced. To all these things I have nothing to 
object; they find a ready assent in my mind: but when you say, 'Why should I 
depend upon the eternal?' who can give assent to this as right? the words are 


void of meaning." Having said thus much, he was silent a while, being restrained 
by respect to their sacred functions; but he was unable to repress his smiles, and 
again said, "What need is there of the eternal? excellent! What need of the 
eternal? admirable! most worthy of you who are my venerable preceptors! Hear 
what need there is of the eternal, if to hearken will not give you pain. The 
fourfold objects of men are said to be virtue, desire, wealth, final emancipation. 
Is he who is the source of all these of no avail? Virtue was derived from the 
eternal by Daksha, Marichi, and other patriarchs; wealth has been obtained front 
him by others; and by others, the enjoyment of their desires: whilst those who, 
through true, wisdom and holy contemplation, have come to know his essence, 
have been released from their bondage, and have attained freedom from 
existence for ever. The glorification of Hari, attainable by unity, is the root of all 
riches, dignity, renown, wisdom, progeny, righteousness, and liberation. Virtue, 
wealth, desire, and even final freedom, Brahmans, are fruits bestowed by him. 
How then can it be said, 'What need is there of the eternal?' But enough of this: 
what occasion is there to say more? You are my venerable preceptors, and, speak 
ye good or evil, it is not for my weak judgment to decide." The priests said to 
him, "We preserved you, boy, when you were about to be consumed by fire, 
confiding that you would no longer eulogize your father's foes: we knew not 
how unwise you were: but if you will not desist from this infatuation at our 
advice, we shall even proceed to perform the rites that will inevitably destroy 
you." To this menace, Prahlada answered, "What living creature slays, or is 
slain? what living creature preserves, or is preserved? Each is his own destroyer 
or preserver, as he follows evil or good." 

Thus spoken to by the youth, the priests of the Daitya sovereign were incensed, 
and instantly had recourse to magic incantations, by which a female form, 
enwreathed with fiery flame, was engendered: she was of fearful aspect, and the 
earth was parched beneath her tread, as she approached Prahlada, and smote him 
with a fiery trident on the breast. In vain! for the weapon fell, broken into a 
hundred pieces, upon the ground. Against the breast in which the imperishable 
Hari resides the thunderbolt would be shivered, much more should such a 
weapon be split in pieces. The magic being, then directed against the virtuous 
prince by the wicked priest, turned upon them, and, having quickly destroyed 
them, disappeared. But Prahlada, beholding them perish, hastily appealed to 
Krishna, the eternal, for succour, and said, "Oh Janarddana! who art every 
where, the creator and substance of the world, preserve these Brahmans from 



this magical and insupportable fire. As thou art Vishnu, present in all creatures, 
and the protector of the world, so let these priests be restored to life. If, whilst 
devoted to the omnipresent Vishnu, I think no sinful resentment against my foes, 
let these priests be restored to life. If those who have come to slay me, those by 
whom poison was given me, the fire that would have burned, the elephants that 
would have crushed, and snakes that would have stung me, have been regarded 
by me as friends; if I have been unshaken in soul, and am without fault in thy 
sight; then, I implore thee, let these, the priests of the Asuras, be now restored to 
life." Thus having prayed, the Brahmans immediately rose up, uninjured and 
rejoicing; and bowing respectfully to Prahlada, they blessed him, and said, 
"Excellent prince, may thy days be many; irresistible be thy prowess; and power 
and wealth and posterity be thine." Having thus spoken, they withdrew, and went 
and told the king of the Daityas all that had passed. 


Footnotes 

01. This is not the doctrine of the impassibility of soul, taught in the Vedas: 
'We do not recognise either the doctrine that supposes the slayer to slay, 
or the slain to be killed; this (spiritual existence) neither kills nor is 
killed.' The same is inculcated at great length, and with great beauty, in 
the Bhagavat Gita: 'Weapons wound it not; fire doth not consume it; 
water cannot drown it; nor doth it wither before the winds:' or, as 
rendered by Schlegel, 'Non ilium penetrant tela; non ilium comburit 
flamma; neque ilium perfundunt aquae; nec ventus exsiccat.'new edition. 
But in the passage of our text, all that the Hindus understand of Fate, is 
referred to. Death or immunity, prosperity or adversity, are in this life the 
inevitable consequences of conduct in a prior existence: no man can 
suffer a penalty which his vices in a preceding state of being have not 
incurred, nor can he avoid it if they have. 




19. Chapter 


Dialogue between Prahlada and his father: he is cast from the top of the palace 
unhurt: baffles the incantations of Samvara: he is thrown fettered into the sea: he 
praises Vishnu. 

WHEN Hiranyakasipu heard that the powerful incantations of his priests had 
been defeated, he sent for his son, and demanded of him the secret of his 
extraordinary might. "Prahlada," he said, "thou art possessed of marvellous 
powers; whence are they derived? are they the result of magic rites? or have they 
accompanied thee from birth?" Prahlada, thus interrogated, bowed down to his 
father's feet, and replied, "Whatever power I possess, father, is neither the result 
of magic rites, nor is it inseparable from my nature; it is no more than that which 
is possessed by all in whose hearts Achyuta abides. He who meditates not of 
wrong to others, but considers them as himself, is free from the effects of sin, 
inasmuch as the cause does not exist; but he who inflicts pain upon others, in act, 
thought, or speech, sows the seed of future birth, and the fruit that awaits him 
after birth is pain. I wish no evil to any, and do and speak no offence; for I 
behold Kesava in all beings, as in my own soul. Whence should corporeal or 
mental suffering or pain, inflicted by elements or the gods, affect me, whose 
heart is thoroughly purified by him? Love, then, for all creatures will be 
assiduously cherished by all those who are wise in the knowledge that Hari is all 
things." 

When he had thus spoken, the Daitya monarch, his face darkened with fury, 
commanded his attendants to cast his son from the summit of the palace where 
he was sitting, and which was many Yojanas in height, down upon the tops of 
the mountains, where his body should be dashed to pieces against the rocks. 
Accordingly the Daityas hurled the boy down, and he fell cherishing Hari in his 
heart, and Earth, the nurse of all creatures, received him gently on her lap, thus 
entirely devoted to Kesava, the protector of the world. 

Beholding him uninjured by the fall, and sound in every bone, Hiranyakasipu 
addressed himself to Samvara, the mightiest of enchanters, and said to him, 
"This perverse boy is not to be destroyed by us: do you, who art potent in the 


arts of delusion, contrive some device for his destruction." Samvara replied, "I 
will destroy him: you shall behold, king of the Daityas, the power of delusion, 
the thousand and the myriad artifices that it can employ." Then the ignorant 
Asura Samvara practised subtile wiles for the extermination of the firm-minded 
Prahlada: but he, with a tranquil heart, and void of malice towards Samvara, 
directed his thoughts uninterruptedly to the destroyer of Madhu; by whom the 
excellent discus, the flaming Sudarsana, was dispatched to defend the youth; and 
the thousand devices of the evil-destinied Samvara were every one foiled by this 
defender of the prince. The king of the Daityas then commanded the withering 
wind to breathe its blighting blast upon his son: and, thus commanded, the wind 
immediately penetrated into his frame, cold, cutting, drying, and insufferable. 
Knowing that the wind had entered into his body, the Daitya boy applied his 
whole heart to the mighty upholder of the earth; and Janarddana, seated in his 
heart, waxed wroth, and drank up the fearful wind, which had thus hastened to 
its own annihilation. 

When the devices of Samvara were all frustrated, and the blighting wind had 
perished, the prudent prince repaired to the residence of his preceptor. His 
teacher instructed him daily in the science of polity, as essential to the 
administration of government, and invented by Usanas for the benefit of kings; 
and when he thought that the modest prince was well grounded in the principles 
of the science, he told the king that Prahlada was thoroughly conversant with the 
mles of government as laid down by the descendant of Bhrigu. Hiranyakasipu 
therefore summoned the prince to his presence, and desired him to repeat what 
he had learned; how a king should conduct himself towards friends or foes; what 
measures he should adopt at the three periods (of advance, retrogression, or 
stagnation); how he should treat his councillors, his ministers, the officers of his 
government and of his household, his emissaries, his subjects, those of doubtful 
allegiance, and his foes; with whom should he contract alliance; with whom 
engage in war; what sort of fortress he should construct; how forest and 
mountain tribes should be reduced; how internal grievances should be rooted 
out: all this, and what else he had studied, the youth was commanded by his 
father to explain. To this, Prahlada having bowed affectionately and reverentially 
to the feet of the king, touched his forehead, and thus replied:— 

"It is true that I have been instructed in all these matters by my venerable 
preceptor, and I have learnt them, but I cannot in all approve them. It is said that 



conciliation, gifts, punishment, and sowing dissension are the means of securing 
friends (or overcoming foes) but I, father—be not angry—know neither friends 
nor foes; and where no object is to be accomplished, the means of effecting it are 
superfluous. It were idle to talk of friend or foe in Govinda, who is the supreme 
soul, lord of the world, consisting of the world, and who is identical with all 
beings. The divine Vishnu is in thee, father, in me, and in all every where else; 
and hence how can I speak of friend or foe, as distinct from myself? It is 
therefore waste of time to cultivate such tedious and unprofitable sciences, 
which are but false knowledge, and all our energies should be dedicated to the 
acquirement of true wisdom. The notion that ignorance is knowledge arises, 
father, from ignorance. Does not the child, king of the Asuras, imagine the fire¬ 
fly to be a spark of fire. That is active duty, which is not for our bondage; that is 
knowledge, which is for our liberation: all other duty is good only unto 
weariness; all other knowledge is only the cleverness of an artist. Knowing this, 
I look upon all such acquirement as profitless. That which is really profitable 
hear me, oh mighty monarch, thus prostrate before thee, proclaim. He who cares 
not for dominion, he who cares not for wealth, shall assuredly obtain both in a 
life to come. All men, illustrious prince, are toiling to be great; but the destinies 
of men, and not their own exertions, are the cause of greatness. Kingdoms are 
the gifts of fate, and are bestowed upon the stupid, the ignorant, the cowardly, 
and those to whom the science of government is unknown. Let him therefore 
who covets the goods of fortune be assiduous in the practice of virtue: let him 
who hopes for final liberation learn to look upon all things as equal and the 
same. Gods, men, animals, birds, reptiles, all are but forms of one eternal 
Vishnu, existing as it were detached from himself. By him who knows this, all 
the existing world, fixed or movable, is to be regarded as identical with himself, 
as proceeding alike from Vishnu, assuming a universal form. When this is 
known, the glorious god of all, who is without beginning or end, is pleased; and 
when he is pleased, there is an end of affliction." 

On hearing this, Hiranyakasipu started up from his throne in a fury, and spurned 
his son on the breast with his foot. Burning with rage, he wrung his hands, and 
exclaimed, "Ho Viprachitti! ho Rahu! ho Bali! bind him with strong bands, and 
cast him into the ocean, or all the regions, the Daityas and Danavas, will become 
converts to the doctrines of this silly wretch. Repeatedly prohibited by us, he still 
persists in the praise of our enemies. Death is the just retribution of the 
disobedient." The Daityas accordingly bound the prince with strong bands, as 



their lord had commanded, and threw him into the sea. As he floated on the 
waters, the ocean was convulsed throughout its whole extent, and rose in mighty 
undulations, threatening to submerge the earth. This when Hiranyakasipu 
observed, he commanded the Daityas to hurl rocks into the sea, and pile them 
closely on one another, burying beneath their incumbent mass him whom fire 
would not burn, nor weapons pierce, nor serpents bite; whom the pestilential 
gale could not blast, nor poison nor magic spirits nor incantations destroy; who 
fell from the loftiest heights unhurt; who foiled the elephants of the spheres: a 
son of depraved heart, whose life was a perpetual curse. "Here," he cried, "since 
he cannot die, here let him live for thousands of years at the bottom of the ocean, 
overwhelmed by mountains. Accordingly the Daityas and Danavas hurled upon 
Prahlada, whilst in the great ocean, ponderous rocks, and piled them over him 
for many thousand miles: but he, still with mind undisturbed, thus offered daily 
praise to Vishnu, lying at the bottom of the sea, under the mountain heap. "Glory 
to thee, god of the lotus eye: glory to thee, most excellent of spiritual things: 
glory to thee, soul of all worlds: glory to thee, wielder of the sharp discus: glory 
to the best of Brahmans; to the friend of Brahmans and of kine; to Krishna, the 
preserver of the world: to Govinda be glory. To him who, as Brahma, creates the 
universe; who in its existence is its preserver; be praise. To thee, who at the end 
of the Kalpa takest the form of Rudra; to thee, who art triform; be adoration. 
Thou, Achyuta, art the gods, Yakshas, demons, saints, serpents, choristers and 
dancers of heaven, goblins, evil spirits, men, animals, birds, insects, reptiles, 
plants, and stones, earth, water, fire, sky, wind, sound, touch, taste, colour, 
flavour, mind, intellect, soul, time, and the qualities of nature: thou art all these, 
and the chief object of them all. Thou art knowledge and ignorance, truth and 
falsehood, poison and ambrosia. Thou art the performance and discontinuance of 
acts thou art the acts which the Vedas enjoin: thou art the enjoyer of the fruit of 
all acts, and the means by which they are accomplished. Thou, Vishnu, who art 
the soul of all, art the fruit of all acts of piety. Thy universal diffusion, indicating 
might and goodness, is in me, in others, in all creatures, in all worlds. Holy 
ascetics meditate on thee: pious priests sacrifice to thee. Thou alone, identical 
with the gods and the fathers of mankind, receivest burnt-offerings and 
oblations. The universe is thy intellectual form whence proceeded thy subtile 
form, this world: thence art thou all subtile elements and elementary beings, and 
the subtile principle, that is called soul, within them. Hence the supreme soul of 
all objects, distinguished as subtile or gross, which is imperceptible, and which 
cannot be conceived, is even a form of thee. Glory be to thee, Purushottama; and 



glory to that imperishable form which, soul of all, is another manifestation of thy 
might, the asylum of all qualities, existing in all creatures. I salute her, the 
supreme goddess, who is beyond the senses; whom the mind, the tongue, cannot 
define; who is to be distinguished alone by the wisdom of the truly wise. Om! 
salutation to Vasudeva: to him who is the eternal lord; he from whom nothing is 
distinct; he who is distinct from all. Glory be to the great spirit again and again: 
to him who is without name or shape; who sole is to be known by adoration; 
whom, in the forms manifested in his descents upon earth, the dwellers in 
heaven adore; for they behold not his inscrutable nature. I glorify the supreme 
deity Vishnu, the universal witness, who seated internally, beholds the good and 
ill of all. Glory to that Vishnu from whom this world is not distinct. May he, ever 
to be meditated upon as the beginning of the universe, have compassion upon 
me: may he, the supporter of all, in whom every thing is warped and woven, 
undecaying, imperishable, have compassion upon me. Glory, again and again, to 
that being to whom all returns, from whom all proceeds; who is all, and in whom 
all things are: to him whom I also am; for he is every where; and through whom 
all things are from me. I am all things: all things are in me, who am everlasting. I 
am undecayable, ever enduring, the receptacle of the spirit of the supreme. 
Brahma is my name; the supreme soul, that is before all things, that is after the 
end of all. 




Footnotes 

01. These are the four Upayas, 'means of success,' specified in the Amera- 
kosha. 

02. Celebrated Daityas. Viprachitti is one of the chief Danavas, or sons of 
Danu, and appointed king over them by Brahma. Rahu was the son of 
Sinhika, more known as the dragon's head, or ascending node, being a 
chief agent in eclipses. Bali was sovereign of the three worlds in the time 
of the dwarf incarnation, and afterwards monarch of Patala. 

03. With Naga pasas, 'snake-nooses;' tortuous and twining round the limbs 
like serpents. 

04. Acts of devotion—sacrifices, oblations, observance of rules of 
purification, almsgiving, and the like—opposed to ascetic and 


contemplative worship, which dispenses with the ritual. 

05. Havya and Kavya, oblations of ghee or oiled butter; the former presented 
to the gods, the latter to the Pitris. 

06. Mahat, the first product of nature, intellect. 

07. The preceding passage was addressed to the Purusha, or spiritual nature, 
of the supreme being: this is addressed to his material essence, his other 
energy, that is, to Pradhana, 

08. Or rather, woven as the warp and woof; ###—### meaning 'woven by the 
long threads,' and ### 'by the cross threads.' 






20. Chapter 


Vishnu appears to Prahlada. Hirariyakasipu relents, and is reconciled to his son: 
he is put to death by Vishnu as the Nrisinha. Prahlada becomes king of the 
Daityas: his posterity: fruit of hearing his story. 

THUS meditating upon Vishnu, as identical with his own spirit, Prahlada became 
as one with him, and finally regarded himself as the divinity: he forgot entirely 
his own individuality, and was conscious of nothing else than his being the 
inexhaustible, eternal, supreme soul; and in consequence of the efficacy of this 
conviction of identity, the imperishable Vishnu, whose essence is wisdom, 
became present in his heart, which was wholly purified from sin. As soon as, 
through the force of his contemplation, Prahlada had become one with Vishnu, 
the bonds with which he was bound burst instantly asunder; the ocean was 
violently uplifted; and the monsters of the deep were alarmed; earth with all her 
forests and mountains trembled; and the prince, putting aside the rocks which the 
demons had piled Upon him, came forth from out the main. When he beheld the 
outer world again, and contemplated earth and heaven, he remembered who he 
was, and recognised himself to be Prahlada; and again he hymned Purushottama, 
who is without beginning or end; his mind being steadily and undeviatingly 
addressed to the object of his prayers, and his speech, thoughts, and acts being 
firmly under control. "Om! glory to the end of all: to thee, lord, who art subtile 
and substantial; mutable and immutable; perceptible and imperceptible; divisible 
and indivisible; indefinable and definable; the subject of attributes, and void of 
attributes; abiding in qualities, though they abide not in thee; morphous and 
amorphous; minute and vast; visible and invisible; hideousness and beauty; 
ignorance and wisdom; cause and effect; existence and non-existence; 
comprehending all that is good and evil; essence of perishable and imperishable 
elements; asylum of undeveloped rudiments. Oh thou who art both one and 
many, Vasudeva, first cause of all; glory be unto thee. Oh thou who art large and 
small, manifest and hidden; who art all beings, and art not all beings; and from 
whom, although distinct from universal cause, the universe proceeds: to thee, 
Purushottama, be all glory." 

Whilst with mind intent on Vishnu, he thus pronounced his praises, the divinity, 


clad in yellow robes, suddenly appeared before him. Startled at the sight, with 
hesitating speech Prahlada pronounced repeated salutations to Vishnu, and said, 
"Oh thou who removest all worldly grief, Kesava, be propitious unto me; again 
sanctify me, Achyuta, by thy sight." The deity replied, "I am pleased with the 
faithful attachment thou hast shown to me: demand from me, Prahlada, whatever 
thou desirest." Prahlada replied, "In all the thousand births through which I may 
be doomed to pass, may my faith in thee, Achyuta, never know decay; may 
passion, as fixed as that which the worldly-minded feel for sensual pleasures, 
ever animate my heart, always devoted unto thee." Bhagavan answered, "Thou 
hast already devotion unto me, and ever shalt have it: now choose some boon, 
whatever is in thy wish." Prahlada then said, "I have been hated, for that I 
assiduously proclaimed thy praise: do thou, oh lord, pardon in my father this sin 
that he Bath committed. Weapons have been hurled against me; I have been 
thrown into the flames; I have been bitten by venomous snakes; and poison has 
been mixed with my food; I have been bound and cast into the sea; and heavy 
rocks have been heaped upon me: but all this, and whatever ill beside has been 
wrought against me; whatever wickedness has been done to me, because I put 
my faith in thee; all, through thy mercy, has been suffered by me unharmed: and 
do thou therefore free my father from this iniquity." To this application Vishnu 
replied, "All this shall be unto thee, through my favour: but I give thee another 
boon: demand it, son of the Asura." Prahlada answered and said, "All my desires, 
oh lord, have been fulfilled by the boon that thou hast granted, that my faith in 
thee shall never know decay. Wealth, virtue, love, are as nothing; for even 
liberation is in his reach whose faith is firm in thee, root of the universal world." 
Vishnu said, "Since thy heart is filled immovably with trust in me, thou shalt, 
through my blessing, attain freedom from existence." Thus saying, Vishnu 
vanished from his sight; and Prahlada repaired to his father, and bowed down 
before him. His father kissed him on the forehead, and embraced him, and shed 
tears, and said, "Dost thou live, my son?" And the great Asura repented of his 
former cruelty, and treated him with kindness: and Prahlada, fulfilling his duties 
like any other youth, continued diligent in the service of his preceptor and his 
father. After his father had been put to death by Vishnu in the form of the man- 
lion, Prahlada became the sovereign of the Daityas; and possessing the 
splendours of royalty consequent upon his piety, exercised extensive sway, and 
was blessed with a numerous progeny. At the expiration of an authority which 
was the reward of his meritorious acts, he was freed from the consequences of 
moral merit or demerit, and obtained, through meditation on the deity, final 



exemption from existence. 


Such, Maitreya, was the Daitya Prahlada, the wise and faithful worshipper of 
Vishnu, of whom you wished to hear; and such was his miraculous power. 
Whoever listens to the history of Prahlada is immediately cleansed from his sins: 
the iniquities that he commits, by night or by day, shall be expiated by once 
hearing, or once reading, the history of Prahlada. The perusal of this history on 
the day of full moon, of new moon, or on the eighth or twelfth day of the 
lunation, shall yield fruit equal to the donation of a cow. As Vishnu protected 
Prahlada in all the calamities to which he was exposed, so shall the deity protect 
him who listens constantly to the tale. 


Footnotes 

01. Literally, 'having smelt his forehead.' I have elsewhere had occasion to 
observe this practice: Hindu Theatre, II. 45. 

02. Here is another instance of that brief reference to popular and prior 
legends, which is frequent in this Puraria. The man-lion Avatara is 
referred to in several of the Purarias, but I have met with the story in 
detail only in the Bhagavata. It is there said that Hirariyakasipu asks his 
son, why, if Vishnu is every where, he is not visible in a pillar in the hall, 
where they are assembled. He then rises, and strikes the column with his 
fist; on which Vishnu, in a form which is neither wholly a lion nor a man, 
issues from it, and a conflict ensues, which ends in Hirariyakasipu's being 
torn to pieces. Even this account, therefore, is not in all particulars the 
same as the popular version of the story. 

03. The days of full and new moon are sacred with all sects of Hindus: the 
eighth and twelfth days of the lunar half month were considered holy by 
the Vaishriavas, as appears from the text. The eighth maintains its 
character in a great degree from the eighth of Bhadra being the birthday 
of Krishna; but the eleventh, in more recent Vaishriava works, as the 
Brahma Vaivartta P., has taken the place of the twelfth, and is even more 
sacred than the eighth. 

04. Or any solemn gift; that of a cow is held particularly sacred; but it 


implies accompaniments of a more costly character, ornaments and gold. 

05. The legend of Prahlada is inserted in detail in the Bhagavata and 
Naradiya Purarias, and in the Uttara Kharida of the Padma: it is adverted 
to more briefly in the Vayu, Linga, Kurma, &c., in the Moksha Dharma 
of the Mahabharata, and in the Hari Vansa. 




21. Chapter 


Families of the Daityas. Descendants of Kasyapa by Danu. Children of Kasyapa 
by his other wives. Birth of the Marutas, the sons of Diti. 

THE sons of Sanhrada, the son of Hiranyakasipu, were Ayushman, Sivi, and 
Vashkala. Prahlada had a son named Virochana; whose son was Bali, who had a 
hundred sons, of whom Bana was the eldest. 

Hiranyaksha also had many sons, all of whom were Daityas of great prowess; 
Jharjhara, Sakuni, Bhutasantapana, Mahanabha, the mighty-armed and the 
valiant Taraka. These were the sons of Diti. 

The children of Kasyapa by Danu were Dwimurddha, Sankara, Ayomukha, 
Sankusiras, Kapila, Samvara, Ekachakra, and another mighty Taraka, 
Swarbhanu, Vrishaparvan, Puloman, and the powerful Viprachitti; these were the 
renowned Danavas, or sons of Danu. 

r r 

Swarbhanu had a daughter named Prabha and Sarmishtha was the daughter of 
Vrishaparvan, as were Upadanavi and Hayasira. 

Vaiswanara had two daughters, Puloma and Kalika, who were both married to 
Kasyapa, and bore him sixty thousand distinguished Danavas, called Paulomas 
and Kalakanjas, who were powerful, ferocious, and cruel. 

The sons of Viprachitti by Sinhika (the sister of Hiranyakasipu) were Vyansa, 
Salya the strong, Nabha the powerful, Vatapi, Namuchi, Ilwala, Khasrima, 
Anjaka, Naraka, and Kalanabha, the valiant Swarbhanu, and the mighty 
Vaktrayodhi. These were the most eminent Danavas, through whom the race of 
Danu was multiplied by hundreds and thousands through succeeding 
generations. 

In the family of the Daitya Prahlada, the Nivata Kavachas were born, whose 
spirits were purified by rigid austerity. 


Tamra (the wife of Kasyapa) had six illustrious daughters, named Suki, Syeni, 
Bhasi, Sugrivi, Suchi, and Gridhrika. Suki gave birth to parrots, owls, and crows 
Syeni to hawks; Bhasi to kites; Gridhrika to vultures; Suchi to water-fowl; 
Sugrivi to horses, camels, and asses. Such were the progeny of Tamra. 

Vinata bore to Kasyapa two celebrated sons, Garuda and Aruna: the former, also 
called Suparna, was the king of the feathered tribes, and the remorseless enemy 
of the serpent race. 

The children of Surasa were a thousand mighty many-headed serpents, 
traversing the sky. 

The progeny of Kadru were a thousand powerful many-headed serpents, of 

r r 

immeasurable might, subject to Garuda; the chief amongst whom were Sesha, 
Vasuki, Takshaka, Sankha, Sweta, Mahapadma, Kambala, Aswatara, Elapatra, 
Naga, Karkkota, Dhananjaya, and many other fierce and venomous serpents. 

The family of Krodhavasa were all sharp-toothed monsters, whether on the 
earth, amongst the birds, or in the waters, that were devourers of flesh. 

Surabhi was the mother of cows and buffaloes Ira, of trees and creeping plants 
and shrubs, and every kind of grass: Khasa, of the Rakshasas and Yakshas Muni, 

r 

of the Apsarasas and Arishta, of the illustrious Gandharbas. 

These were the children of Kasyapa, whether movable or stationary, whose 
descendants multiplied infinitely through successive generations. This creation, 
oh Brahman, took place in the second or Swarochisha Manwantara. In the 
present or Vaivaswata Manwantara, Brahma being engaged at the great sacrifice 
instituted by Varuna, the creation of progeny, as it is called, occurred; for he 
begot, as his sons, the seven Rishis, who were formerly mind-engendered; and 
was himself the grand-sire of the Gandharbas, serpents, Danavas, and gods. 

Diti, having lost her children, propitiated Kasyapa; and the best of ascetics, 
being pleased with her, promised her a boon; on which she prayed for a son of 
irresistible prowess and valour, who should destroy Indra. The excellent Muni 
granted his wife the great gift she had solicited, but with one condition: "You 
shall bear a son," he said, "who shall slay Indra, if with thoughts wholly pious, 



and person entirely pure, you carefully carry the babe in your womb for a 
hundred years." Having thus said, Kasyapa departed; and the dame conceived, 
and during gestation assiduously observed the rules of mental and personal 
purity. When the king of the immortals, learnt that Diti bore a son destined for 
his destruction, he came to her, and attended upon her with the utmost humility, 
watching for an opportunity to disappoint her intention. At last, in the last year 
of the century, the opportunity occurred. Diti retired one night to rest without 
performing the prescribed ablution of her feet, and fell asleep; on which the 
thunderer divided with his thunderbolt the embryo in her womb into seven 
portions. The child, thus mutilated, cried bitterly; and Indra repeatedly attempted 
to console and silence it, but in vain: on which the god, being incensed, again 
divided each of the seven portions into seven, and thus formed the swift-moving 
deities called Marutas (winds). They derived this appellation from the words 
with which Indra had addressed them (Ma rodih, 'Weep not'); and they became 
forty-nine subordinate divinities, the associates of the wielder of the thunderbolt. 


Footnotes 

01. The Padma P. makes these the sons of Prahlada. The Bhagavata says 
there were five sons, but does not give the names. It also inserts the sons 
of Hlada, making them the celebrated demons Ilwala and Vatapi. The 
Vayu refers to Hlada, other Daityas, famous in Pauranic legend, making 
his son, Nisunda; and his sons, Sunda and Upasunda; the former the 
father of Maricha and Taraka; the latter, of Muka. 

02. The Padma P. and Vayu name several of these, but they are not of any 
note: the latter gives the names of two daughters, who are more 
celebrated, Putana and Sakuni. 

03. The descendants of Hiranyaksha are said, in the Padma P., to have 
extended to seventy-seven crores, or seven hundred and seventy millions. 
Some copies, for Taraka, read Kalanabha. 

04. The Padma and Vayu P. furnish a much longer list of names, but those of 
most note are the same as in the text, with which also the Bhagavata for 
the most part agrees. 

05. The Bhagavata makes Prabha the wife of Namuchi: according to the 


Vayu, she is the mother of Nahusha. 

06. Married to Yayati, as will be related. 

07. The text might be understood to imply that the latter two were the 
daughters of Vaiswanara; and the Bhagavata has, "The four lovely 
daughters of Vaiswanara were Upadanavi, Hayasiras, Puloma, and 
Kalaka." The Padma substitutes Vajra and Sundarl for the two former 
names. The Vayu specifies only Puloma and Kalika as the daughters of 
Vaiswanara, as does our text. Upadanavi, according to the Bhagavata, is 
the wife of Hirariyaksha; and Hayasiras, of Kratu. 

08. Though not specified by the text as one of the Danavas, he is included in 
the catalogue of the Vayu, and the commentator on the Bhagavata calls 
him a son of Danu. 

09. The word is also read Kulakas and Kalakeyas: the Mahabharata, I. 643, 
has Kalakanjas. 

10. The text omits the two most celebrated of the Sainhikeyas, or sons of 
Sinhika, Rahu and Ketu, who are specified both in the Bhagavata and the 
Vayu; the former as the eldest son. Of the other sons it is said by the 
Vayu that they were all killed by Parasurama. 

11. Two names of note, found in the Vayu, are omitted by the Vishnu; that of 
Puloman, the father of Sachl, the wife of Indra, and mother of Jayanta; 
and Maya, the father of Vajrakama and Mahodarl. 

12. The Bhagavata says the Paulomas were killed by Arjuna, who therefore, 
the commentator observes, were the same as the Nivata Kavachas: but 
the Mahabharata describes the destruction of the Nivata Kavachas and of 
the Paulomas and Kalakeyas as the successive exploits of Arjuna. Vana. 
I. 633. The story is narrated in detail only in the Mahabharata, which is 
consequently prior to all the Purarias in which the allusion occurs. 
According to that work, the Nivata Kavachas were Danavas, to the 
number of thirty millions, residing in the depths of the sea; and the 
Paulomas and Kalakanjas were the children of two Daitya dames, 
Puloma and Kalaka, inhabiting Hiranyapura, the golden city, floating in 
the air. 

13. All the copies read ### which should be, 'Suki bore parrots; and Uluki, 
the several sorts of owls? but Uluki is nowhere named as one of the 
daughters of Tamra; and the reading may be, 'Owls and birds opposed to 
owls, i. e. crows. The authorities generally concur with our text; but the 

r r 

Vayu has a somewhat different account; or, Suki, married to Garuda, the 



mother of parrots: Syeni, married to Aruha, mother of Sampati and 

r 

Jatayu: Bhasi, the mother of jays, owls, crows, peacocks, pigeons, and 
fowls: Kraunchi, the parent of curlews, herons, cranes: and Dhritarashtri, 
the mother of geese, ducks, teal, and other water-fowl. The three last are 
also called the wives of Garuda. 

14. Most of the Puranas agree in this account; but the Bhagavata makes 
Vinata the wife of Tarksha, and in this place substitutes Sarama, the 
mother of wild animals. The Vayu adds the metres of the Vedas as the 
daughters of Vinata; and the Padma gives her one daughter Saudamini. 

15. The dragons of modern fable. Anayush or Danayush is substituted for 
Surasa in the Vayu, and in one of the accounts of the Padma. The 
Bhagavata says Rakshasas were her offspring. The Matsya has both 
Surasa and Anayush, making the former the parent of all quadrupeds, 
except cows; the latter, the mother of diseases. 

16. The Vayu names forty: the most noted amongst whom, in addition to 
those of the text, are Airavata, Dhritarashtra, Mahanila, Balahaka, 
Anjana, Pushpadanshtra, Durmukha, Kaliya, Puridarika, Kapila, 
Nahusha, and Mani. 

17. By Danshtrina some understand, serpents, some Rakshasas; but by the 
context carnivorous animals, birds, and fishes seem intended. The Vayu 
makes Krodhavasa the mother of twelve daughters, Mrigi and others, 
from whom all wild animals, deer, elephants, monkeys, tigers, lions, 
dogs, also fishes, reptiles, and Bhutas and Pisachas, or goblins, sprang. 

18. One copy only inserts a half stanza here; "Krodha was the mother of the 
Pisachas;" which is an interpolation apparently from the Matsya or Hari 
Vansa. The Padma P., second legend, makes Krodha the mother of the 
Bhutas; and Pisacha, of the Pisachas. 

19. The Bhagavata says, of animals with cloven hoofs. The Vayu has, of the 
eleven Rudras, of the bull of Siva, and of two daughters, Rohirii and 
Gandharbi; from the former of whom descended horned cattle; and from 
the latter, horses. 

20. According to the Vayu, Khasa had two sons, Yaksha and Rakshas, 
severally the progenitors of those beings. 

21. The Padma, second series, makes Vach the mother of both Apsarasas and 
Gandharbas: the Vayu has long lists of the names of both classes, as well 
as of Vidyadharas and Kinnaras. The Apsarasas are distinguished as of 
two kinds, Laukika, 'worldly,' of whom thirty-four are specified; and 


Daivika, or 'divine,' ten in number: the latter furnish the individuals most 
frequently engaged in the interruption of the penances of holy sages, such 
as Menaka, Sahajanya, Ghritachi, Pramlocha, Viswachi, and Piirvachitti. 
Urvasi is of a different order to both, being the daughter of Narayaria. 
Rambha, Tilotama Misrakesi, are included amongst the Laukika nymphs. 
There are also fourteen Garias, or troops, of Apsarasas, bearing peculiar 
designations, as Ahutas, Sobhayantis, Vegavatis, &c. 

22. The Kurma, Matsya, Brahma, Linga, Agni, Padma, and Vayu Puranas 
agree generally with our text in the description of Kasyapa's wives and 
progeny. The Vayu enters most into details, and contains very long 
catalogues of the names of the different characters descended from the 
sage. The Padma and Matsya and the Hari Vansa repeat the story, but 
admit several variations, some of which have been adverted to in the 
preceding notes. 

23. We have a considerable variation here in the commentary, and it may be 
doubted if the allusion in the text is accurately explained by either of the 
versions. In one it is said that 'Brahma, the grandsire of the Gandharbas, 
&c., appointed the seven Rishis, who were born in a former Manwantara, 
to be his sons, or to be the intermediate agents in creation: he created no 
other beings himself, being engrossed by the sacrificial ceremony.' 
Instead of "putratwe," 'in the state of sons,' the reading is sometimes 
"pitratwe," 'in the character of fathers;' that is, to all other beings. Thus 
the gods and the rest, who in a former Manwantara originated from 
Kasyapa, were created in the present period as the offspring of the seven 
Rishis. The other explanation agrees with the preceding in ascribing the 
birth of all creatures to the intermediate agency of the seven Rishis, but 
calls them the actual sons of Brahma, begotten at the sacrifice of Vanilla, 
in the sacrificial fire. The authority for the story is not given, beyond its 
being in other Puranas, it has the air of a modern mystification. The latter 
member of the passage is separated altogether from the foregoing, and 
carried on to what follows: thus; "In the war of the Gandharbas, serpents, 
gods, and demons, Diti having lost her children," &c.; the word 'virodha' 
being understood, it is said, This is defended by the authority of the Hari 
Vansa, where the passage occurs word for word, except in the last half 
stanza, which, instead of ### occurs ###. The parallel passages are thus 
rendered by M. Langlois: 'Le Mouni Swarotchicha avoit cesse de regner 
quand cette creation eut lieu: c’etait sous Pempire du Menou Vevaswata 



le sacrifice de Varouna avait commence. La premiere creation fut celle de 
Brahma, quand il jugea qu’il etait temps de proceder a son sacrifice, et 
que, souverain aieul du monde, il forma lui-meme dans sa pensee et 
enfanta les sept Brahmarchis.' 

24. This legend occurs in all those Puranas in which the account of Kasyapa's 
family is related. 




22. Chapter 


Dominion over different provinces of creation assigned to different beings. 
Universality of Vishnu. Four varieties of spiritual contemplation. Two conditions 
of spirit. The perceptible attributes of Vishnu types of his imperceptible 
properties. Vishnu every thing. Merit of hearing the first book of the Vishnu 
Pur ana. 

WHEN Prithu was installed in the government of the earth, the great father of 
the spheres established sovereignties in other parts of the creation. Soma was 
appointed monarch of the stars and planets, of Brahmans and of plants, of 
sacrifices and of penance. Vaisravaria was made king over kings; and Varuria, 
over the waters. Vishnu was the chief of the Adityas; Pavaka, of the Vasus; 
Daksha, of the patriarchs; Vasava, of the winds. To Prahlada was assigned 
dominion over the Daityas and Danavas; and Yama, the king of justice, was 
appointed the monarch of the Manes (Pitris). Airavata was made the king of 
elephants; Garuda, of birds; Indra, of the gods. Uchchaisravas was the chief of 
horses; Vrishabha, of kine. Sesha became the snake-king; the lion, the monarch 
of the beasts; and the sovereign of the trees was the holy fig-tree. Having thus 
fixed the limits of each authority, the great progenitor Brahma stationed rulers 
for the protection of the different quarters of the world: he made Sudhanwan, the 
son of the patriarch Viraja, the regent of the east; Sankhapada, the son of the 
patriarch Kardama, of the south; the immortal Ketumat, the son of Rajas, regent 
of the west; and Hirariyaroman, the son of the patriarch Parjanya, regent of the 
north. By these the whole earth, with its seven continents and its cities, is to the 
present day vigilantly protected, according to their several limits. 

All these monarchs, and whatever others may be invested with authority by the 
mighty Vishnu, as instruments for the preservation of the world; ah the kings 
who have been, and all who shall be; are ah, most worthy Brahman, but portions 
of the universal Vishnu. The rulers of the gods, the rulers of the Daityas, the 
mlers of the Danavas, and the rulers of ah malignant spirits; the chief amongst 
beasts, amongst birds, amongst men, amongst serpents; the best of trees, of 
mountains, of planets; either those that now are, or that shah hereafter be, the 
most exalted of their kind; are but portions of the universal Vishnu. The power of 


protecting created things, the preservation of the world, resides with no other 
than Hari, the lord of all. He is the creator, who creates the world; he, the eternal, 
preserves it in its existence; and he, the destroyer, destroys it; invested severally 
with the attributes of foulness, goodness, and gloom. By a fourfold manifestation 
does Janarddana operate in creation, preservation, and destruction. In one 
portion, as Brahma, the invisible assumes a visible form; in another portion he, 
as Marichi and the rest, is the progenitor of all creatures; his third portion is 
time; his fourth is all beings: and thus he becomes quadruple in creation, 
invested with the quality of passion. In the preservation of the world he is, in one 
portion, Vishnu; in another portion he is Manu and the other patriarchs; he is 
time in a third; and all beings in a fourth portion: and thus, endowed with the 
property of goodness, Purushottama preserves the world. When he assumes the 
property of darkness, at the end of all things, the unborn deity becomes in one 
portion Rudra; in another, the destroying fire; in a third, time; and in a fourth, all 
beings: and thus, in a quadruple form, he is the destroyer of the world. This, 
Brahman, is the fourfold condition of the deity at all seasons. 

Brahma, Daksha, time, and all creatures are the four energies of Hari, which are 
the causes of creation. Vishnu, Manu and the rest, time, and all creatures are the 
four energies of Vishnu, which are the causes of duration. Rudra, the destroying 
fire, time, and all creatures are the four energies of Janarddana that are exerted 
for universal dissolution. In the beginning and the duration of the world, until the 
period of its end, creation is the work of Brahma, the patriarchs, and living 
animals. Brahma creates in the beginning; then the patriarchs beget progeny; and 
then animals incessantly multiply their kinds: but Brahma is not the active agent 
in creation, independent of time; neither are the patriarchs, nor living animals. 
So, in the periods of creation and of dissolution, the four portions of the god of 
gods are equally essential. Whatever, oh Brahman, is engendered by any living 
being, the body of Hari is cooperative in the birth of that being; so whatever 
destroys any existing thing, movable or stationary, at any time, is the destroying 
form of Janarddana as Rudra. Thus Janarddana is the creator, the preserver, and 
the destroyer of the whole world—being threefold—in the several seasons of 
creation, preservation, and destruction, according to his assumption of the three 
qualities: but his highest glory is detached from all qualities; for the fourfold 
essence of the supreme spirit is composed of true wisdom, pervades all things, is 
only to be appreciated by itself, and admits of no similitude. 



MAITREYA.—But, Muni, describe to me fully the four varieties of the condition 
of Brahma, and what is the supreme condition. 

PARASARA.— 1 That, Maitreya, which is the cause of a thing is called the means 
of effecting it; and that which it is the desire of the soul to accomplish is the 
thing to be effected. The operations of the Yogi who is desirous of liberation, as 
suppression of breath and the like, are his means: the end is the supreme 
Brahma, whence he returns to the world no more. Essentially connected with, 
and dependant upon, the means employed for emancipation by the Yogi, is 
discriminative knowledge; and this is the first variety of the condition of 
Brahma. The second sort is the knowledge that is to be acquired by the Yogi 
whose end is escape from suffering, or eternal felicity. The third kind is the 
ascertainment of the identity of the end and the means, the rejection of the notion 
of duality. The last kind is the removal of whatever differences may have been 
conceived by the three first varieties of knowledge, and the consequent 
contemplation of the true essence of soul. The supreme condition of Vishnu, who 
is one with wisdom, is the knowledge of truth; which requires no exercise; which 
is not to be taught; which is internally diffused; which is unequalled; the object 
of which is self-illumination; which is simply existent, and is not to be defined; 
which is tranquil, fearless, pure; which is not the theme of reasoning; which 
stands in need of no support. Those Yogis who, by the annihilation of ignorance, 
are resolved into this fourfold Brahma, lose the seminal property, and can no 
longer germinate in the ploughed field of worldly existence. This is the supreme 
condition, that is called Vishnu, perfect, perpetual, universal, undecaying, entire, 
and uniform: and the Yogi who attains this supreme spirit (Brahma) returns not 
to life again; for there he is freed from the distinction of virtue and vice, from 
suffering, and from soil. 

There are two states of this Brahma; one with, and one without shape; one 
perishable, and one imperishable; which are inherent in all beings. The 
imperishable is the supreme being; the perishable is ah the world. The blaze of 
fire burning on one spot diffuses light and heat around; so the world is nothing 
more than the manifested energy of the supreme Brahma: and inasmuch, 
Maitreya, as the light and heat are stronger or feebler as we are near to the fire, 
or far off from it, so the energy of the supreme is more or less intense in the 
beings that are less or more remote from him. Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva are the 
most powerful energies of god; next to them are the inferior deities, then the 



attendant spirits, then men, then animals, birds, insects, vegetables; each 
becoming more and more feeble as they are farther from their primitive source. 
In this way, illustrious Brahman, this whole world, although in essence 
imperishable and eternal, appears and disappears, as if it was subject to birth and 
death. 

The supreme condition of Brahma, which is meditated by the Yogis in the 
commencement of their abstraction, as invested with form, is Vishnu, composed 
of all the divine energies, and the essence of Brahma, with whom the mystic 
union that is sought, and which is accompanied by suitable elements, is effected 
by the devotee whose whole mind is addressed to that object. This Hari, who is 
the most immediate of all the energies of Brahma, is his embodied shape, 
composed entirely of his essence; and in him therefore is the whole world 
interwoven; and from him, and in him, is the universe; and he, the supreme lord 
of all, comprising all that is perishable and imperishable, bears upon him all 
material and spiritual existence, identified in nature with his ornaments and 
weapons. 

MAITREYA.—Tell me in what manner Vishnu bears the whole world, abiding in 
his nature, characterised by ornaments and weapons. 

PARASARA.—Having offered salutation to the mighty and indescribable 
Vishnu, I repeat to you what was formerly related to me by Vasishtha. The 
glorious Hari wears the pure soul of the world, undefiled, and void of qualities, 
as the Kaustubha gem. The chief principle of things (Pradhana) is seated on the 
eternal, as the Srivatsa mark. Intellect abides in Madhava, in the form of his 
mace. The lord (Iswara) supports egotism (Ahankara) in its twofold division, 
into elements and organs of sense, in the emblems of his conch-shell and his 
bow. In his hand Vishnu holds, in the form of his discus, the mind, whose 
thoughts (like the weapon) fly swifter than the winds. The necklace of the deity 
Vaijayanti, composed of five precious gems, is the aggregate of the five 
elemental rudiments. Janarddana bears, in his numerous shafts, the faculties both 
of action and of perception. The bright sword of Achyuta is holy wisdom, 
concealed at some seasons in the scabbard of ignorance. In this manner soul, 
nature, intellect, egotism, the elements, the senses, mind, ignorance, and 
wisdom, are all assembled in the person of Hrishikesa. Hari, in a delusive form, 
embodies the shapeless elements of the world, as his weapons and his 



ornaments, for the salvation of mankind. Pundarikaksha, the lord of all, assumes 
nature, with all its products, soul and all the world. All that is wisdom, all that is 
ignorance, all that is, all that is not, all that is everlasting, is centred in the 
destroyer of Madhu, the lord of all creatures. The supreme, eternal Hari is time, 
with its divisions of seconds, minutes, days, months, seasons, and years: he is the 
seven worlds, the earth, the sky, heaven, the world of patriarchs, of sages, of 
saints, of truth: whose form is all worlds; first-born before all the first-born; the 
supporter of all beings, himself self-sustained: who exists in manifold forms, as 
gods, men, and animals; and is thence the sovereign lord of all, eternal: whose 
shape is all visible things; who is without shape or form: who is celebrated in the 
Vedanta as the Rich, Yajush, Sanaa, and Atharva Vedas, inspired history, and 
sacred science. The Vedas, and their divisions; the institutes of Manu and other 
lawgivers; traditional scriptures, and religious manuals poems, and all that is 
said or sung; are the body of the mighty Vishnu, assuming the form of sound. All 
kinds of substances, with or without shape, here or elsewhere, are the body of 
Vishnu. I am Hari. All that I behold is Janarddana; cause and effect are from 
none other than him. The man who knows these truths shall never again 
experience the afflictions of worldly existence. 

Thus, Brahman, has the first portion of this Purana been duly revealed to you: 
listening to which, expiates all offences. The man who hears this Purana obtains 
the fruit of bathing in the Pushkara lake for twelve years, in the month of Kartik. 
The gods bestow upon him who hears this work the dignity of a divine sage, of a 
patriarch, or of a spirit of heaven. 


Footnotes 

01. These are similarly enumerated in the Vayu, Brahma, Padma, Bhagavata, 
&c., with some additions; as, Agni, king of the Pitris; Vayu, of the 
Gandharbas; Sulapani (Siva), of the Bhutas; Kuvera, of riches, and of the 
Yakshas; Vasuki, of the Nagas; Takshaka, of serpents; Chitraratha, of the 
Gandharbas; Kamadeva, of the Apsarasas; Viprachitti, of the Danavas; 
Rahu, of meteors; Parjanya, of clouds; Samvatsara, of times and seasons; 
Samudra, of rivers; Himavat, of mountains, &c. 


02. We have already had occasion to notice the descent of these Lokapalas, 
as specified in the Vayu P.; and it is evident, although the Vishnu does 
not supply a connected series of generations, yet that both accounts are 
derived from a common source. 

03. Vibhuti, superhuman or divine power or dignity. 

04. The question, according to the commentator, implies a doubt how the 
supreme being, who is without qualities, can be subject to specific 
variety, or to existence in divided and different conditions. 

05. Of Brahmabhuta; of him who, or that which, becomes identified with the 
supreme spirit, which is the same respectively with absolute wisdom, 
Jnana, and discriminative wisdom, Vijnana; leading to felicity, or the 
condition of Brahma, expressed by the words, Sat chit anandam, 'entire 
tranquillity of mind,' or 'internal enjoyment:' the same also with the 
combination of wisdom and tranquillity, which the devotee believes to 
exist in Adwaita, 'non- duality,' or unity of god and himself: and finally, 
the same with the aggregate of these three processes, or the conviction 
that spirit is one, universal, and the same. 

06. The epithets of Jnyana, 'wisdom,' here employed, are taken from the 
Yoga philosophy. 'Requires no exercise,' Nirvyapara, is explained, 
'without the practice of abstract contemplation,' &c. . 'Not to be taught,' 
Anakhyeyam; 'not capable of being enjoined.' 'Internally diffused,' 
Vyaptimatram, means 'mental identification of individual with universal 
spirit' . The phrase translated 'the object of which is self-illumination,' is 
explained ###. 'Simply existent' is said to mean, 'being unmodified by the 
accidents of happiness,' &c.; consequently it is not to be defined . So the 
Yoga Pradipa explains Samadhi, or contemplation, to be the entire 
occupation of the thoughts by the idea of Brahma, without any effort of 
the mind. It is the entire abandonment of the faculties to one all- 
engrossing notion. 'Tranquil,' Prasantam, is, 'being void of passion,' &c. 
'Fearless; not dreading agitation or perplexity by ideas of duality. 'Pure;' 
undisturbed by external objects. 'Not the theme of reasoning'; that is, 'not 
to be ascertained by logical deduction.' 'Stands in no need of support'; not 
resting or depending upon perceptible objects. 

07. The great Yoga is produced. This great Yoga, or union, is to have its 
relation or dependance, which is Vishnu; and its seed, or mystical 
ejaculations; and to be accompanied with Mantras and silent repetitions, 
or Japa. 



08. Or of pearl, ruby, emerald, sapphire, and diamond. 

09. We have in the text a representation of one mode of Dhyana, or 
contemplation, in which the conception of a thing is attempted to be 
rendered more definite by thinking upon its types; or in which, at least, 
the thoughts are more readily concentrated by being addressed to a 
sensible emblem, instead of an abstract truth. Thus the Yogi here says to 
himself, "I meditate upon the jewel on Vishnu's brow, as the soul of the 
world; upon the gem on his breast, as the first principle of things;" and so 
on: and thus through a perceptible substance proceeds to an 
imperceptible idea. 

10. Akhyanani is said to denote the Purarias, and Anuvada the Kalpa, Sara, 
and similar works, containing directions for supplementary rites. 

11. The celebrated lake Pokher in Ajmer. 




The Vishnu Purana-Book 2 


01. Chapter 
02. Chapter 
03. Chapter 

Topographical Lists From The Mahabharata 
04. Chapter 
05. Chapter 
06. Chapter 
07. Chapter 
08. Chapter 
09. Chapter 

10. Chapter 

11. Chapter 

12. Chapter 

13. Chapter 

14. Chapter 

15. Chapter 

16. Chapter 




01. Chapter 


Descendants of Priyavrata, the eldest son of Swayambhuva Manu: his ten sons: 
three adopt a religious life; the others become kings of the seven Dwipas, or 
isles, of the earth. Agnidhra, king of Jambu-dwipa, divides it into nine portions, 
which he distributes amongst his sons. Nabhi, king of the south, succeeded by 
Rishabha; and he by Bharata: India named after him Bharata: his descendants 
reign during the Swayambhuva Manwantara. 

MAITREYA.—You have related to me, venerable preceptor, most fully, all that I 
was curious to hear respecting the creation of the world; but there is a part of the 
subject which I am desirous again to have described. You stated that Priyavrata 
and Uttanapada were the sons of Swayambhuva Manu, and you repeated the 
story of Dhruva, the son of Uttanapada: you made no mention of the descendants 
of Priyavrata, and it is an account of his family that I beg you will kindly 
communicate to me. 

PARASARA.—Priyavrata married Kamya, the daughter of the patriarch 
Kardama, and had by her two daughters, Samrat and Kukshi, and ten sons, wise, 
valiant, modest, and dutiful, named Agnidhra, Agnibahu, Vapushmat, Dyutimat, 
Medha, Medhatithi, Bhavya, Savala, Putra, and the tenth was Jyotishmat, 
illustrious by nature as by name. These were the sons of Priyavrata, famous for 
strength and prowess. Of these, three, or Medha, Putra, and Agnibahu, adopted a 
religious life: remembering the occurrences of a prior existence, they did not 
covet dominion, but diligently practised the rites of devotion in due season, 
wholly disinterested, and looking for no reward. 

Priyavrata having divided the earth into seven continents, gave them respectively 
to his other seven sons. To Agnidhra he gave Jambu-dwipa; to Medhatithi he 
gave Plaksha-dwipa: he installed Vapushmat in the sovereignty over the Dwipa 
of Salmali; and made Jyotishmat king of Kusa-dwipa: he appointed Dyutimat to 
rule over Krauncha-dwipa; Bhavya to reign over Saka-dwipa; and Savala he 
nominated the monarch of the Dwipa of Pushkara. 

Agnidhra, the king of Jambu-dwipa, had nine sons, equal in splendour to the 


patriarchs: they were named Nabhi, Kimpurusha, Harivarsha, Ilavrita, Ramya, 
Hiranvat, Kuril, Bhadraswa, and Ketumala, who was a prince ever active in the 
practice of piety. 

Hear next, Maitreya, in what manner Agnidhra apportioned Jambu-dwipa 
amongst his nine sons. He gave to Nabhi the country called Hima, south of the 
Himavat, or snowy mountains. The country of Hemakuta he gave to 
Kimpurusha; and to Harivarsha, the country of Nishadha. The region in the 
centre of which mount Meru is situated he conferred on Ilavrita; and to Ramya, 
the countries lying between it and the Nila mountain. To Hiranvat his father gave 
the country lying to the north of it, called Sweta; and, on the north of the Sweta 
mountains, the country bounded by the Sringavan range he gave to Kuru. The 
countries on the east of Meru he assigned to Bhadraswa; and Gandhamadana, 
which lay west of it, he gave to Ketumala.' Having installed his sons sovereigns 
in these several regions, the pious king Agnidhra retired to a life of penance at 
the holy place of pilgrimage, Salagrama. 

The eight Varshas, or countries, Kimpurusha and the rest, are places of perfect 
enjoyment, where happiness is spontaneous and uninterrupted. In them there is 
no vicissitude, nor the dread of decrepitude or death: there is no distinction of 
virtue or vice, nor difference of degree as better or worse, nor any of the effects 
produced in this region by the revolutions of ages. 

Nabhi, who had for his portion the country of Himahwa, had by his queen Meru 
the magnanimous Rishabha; and he had a hundred sons, the eldest of whom was 
Bharata. Rishabha having ruled with equity and wisdom, and celebrated many 
sacrificial rites, resigned the sovereignty of the earth to the heroic Bharata, and, 
retiring to the hermitage of Pulastya, adopted the life of an anchoret, practising 
religious penance, and performing all prescribed ceremonies, until, emaciated by 
his austerities, so as to be but a collection of skin and fibres, he put a pebble in 
his mouth, and naked went the way of all flesh. The country was termed Bharata 
from the time that it was relinquished to Bharata by his father, on his retiring to 
the woods. 

Bharata, having religiously discharged the duties of his station, consigned the 
kingdom to his son Sumati, a most virtuous prince; and, engaging in devout 
practices, abandoned his life at the holy place, Salagrama: he was afterwards 



born again as a Brahman, in a distinguished family of ascetics. I shall hereafter 
relate to you his history. 

From the illustrious Sumati was born Indradyumna: his son was Parameshthin: 
his son was Pratihara, who had a celebrated son, named Pratihartta: his son was 
Bhava, who begot Udgitha, who begot Prastara; whose son was Prithu. The son 
of Prithu was Nakta: his son was Gaya: his son was Nara; whose son was Virat. 
The valiant son of Virat was Dhimat, who begot Mahanta; whose son was 
Manasyu; whose son was Twashtri: his son was Viraja: his son was Raja: his son 
was Satajit, who had a hundred sons, of whom Viswagjyotish was the eldest. 
Under these princes, Bharata-varsha (India) was divided into nine portions (to be 
hereafter particularized); and their descendants successively held possession of 
the country for seventy-one periods of the aggregate of the four ages (or for the 
reign of a Manu). 

This was the creation of Swayambhuva Manu, by which the earth was peopled, 
when he presided over the first Manwantara, in the Kalpa of Varaha 


Footnotes 

01. The text reads Kanya; and the commentator has, 'he married the daughter 
of Kardama, whose name was Kanya.' The copies agree in the reading, 
and the Vayu has the same name, Kanya; but the Markarideya, which is 
the same in other respects as our text, has Kamya: Kamya also is the 
name elsewhere given by the Vayu to the daughter of Kardama. Kamya, 
as has been noticed, appears in the Brahma and Hari V. as the mother of 
Priyavrata, but erroneously; and the same authorities specify a Kamya as 
the wife of that sovereign. So the commentator on the Hari V. states, 
'another Kamya is mentioned (in the text), the daughter of Kardama, the 
wife of Priyavrata.' The name Kanya is therefore most probably an error 
of the copyists. The Bhagavata calls the wife of Priyavrata, Varhishmati, 
the daughter of Viswakarman. 

02. These names nearly agree in the authorities which specify the 
descendants of Priyavrata, except in the Bhagavata: that has an almost 


entirely different series of names, or Agnidhra, Idhmajihwa, Yajnabahu, 

r 

Mahavira, Hirariyaretas, Medhatithi, Ghritaprishtha, Savana, Vitihotra, 
and Kavi; with one daughter, Urjjaswati. It also calls the Manus Uttama, 
Tamasa, and Raivata the sons of Priyavrata by another wife. 

03. According to the Bhagavata, he drove his chariot seven times round the 
earth, and the ruts left by the wheels became the beds of the oceans, 
separating it into seven Dwipas. 

04. Even the Bhagavata concurs with the other Purarias in this series of 
Priyavrata's grandsons. 

05. Of these divisions, as well as of those of the earth, and of the minor 
divisions of the Varshas, we have further particulars in the following 
chapter. 

06. This place of pilgrimage has not been found elsewhere. The term is 
usually applied to a stone, an ammonite, which is supposed to be a type 
of Vishnu, and of which the worship is enjoined in the Uttara Kharida of 
the Padma P. and in the Brahma Vaivartta, authorities of no great weight 
or antiquity. As these stones are found chiefly in the Gandak river, the 
Salagrama Tirtha was probably at the source of that stream, or at its 
confluence with the Ganges. Its sanctity, and that of the stone, are 
probably of comparatively modern origin. 

07. 'The great road,' or 'road of heroes.' The pebble was intended either to 
compel perpetual silence, or to prevent his eating. The Bhagavata adverts 
to the same circumstance. That work enters much more into detail on the 
subject of Rishabha's devotion, and particularizes circumstances not 
found in any other Puraria. The most interesting of these are the scene of 

r r 

Rishabha's wanderings, which is said to be Konka, Venkata, Kutaka, and 
southern Karnataka, or the western part of the Peninsula; and the 
adoption of the Jain belief by the people of those countries. Thus it is 

r r 

said, "A king of the Konkas, Venkatas, and Kutakas, named Arhat, having 
heard the tradition of Rishabha's practices (or his wandering about naked, 
and desisting from religious rites), being infatuated by necessity, under 
the evil influence of the Kali age, will become needlessly alarmed, and 
abandon his own religious duty, and will foolishly enter upon an 
unrighteous and heretical path. Misled by him, and bewildered by the 
iniquitous operation of the Kali age, disturbed also by the delusions of 
the deity, wicked men will, in great numbers, desert the institutes and 
purifications of their own ritual; will observe vows injurious and 


disrespectful to the gods; will desist from ablutions, mouth-washings, 
and purifications, and will pluck out the hair of the head; and will revile 
the world, the deity, sacrifices, Brahmans, and the Vedas." It is also said, 
that Sumati, the son of Bharata, will be irreligiously worshipped by some 
infidels, as a divinity. Besides the import of the term Arhat, or Jain, 
Rishabha is the name of the first, and Sumati of the fifth Tirthakara, or 
Jain saint of the present era. There can be no doubt, therefore, that the 
Bhagavata intends this sect; and as the Jain system was not matured until 
a comparatively modern date, this composition is determined to be also 
recent. The allusions to the extension of the Jain faith in the western parts 
of the Peninsula, may serve to fix the limit of its probable antiquity to the 
11th or 12th century, when the Jains seem to have been flourishing in 
Guzerat and the Konkan. As. Res. XVII. 232. 

08. This etymology is given in other Puranas; but the Matsya and Vayu have 
a different one, deriving it from the Manu, called Bharata, or the 
cherisher, one who rears or cherishes progeny. The Vayu has, in another 
place, the more common explanation also: ###. 

09. The Agni, Kurma, Markandeya, Linga, and Vayu Puranas agree with the 
Vishnu in these genealogical details. The Bhagavata has some additions 
and variations of nomenclature, but is not essentially different. It ends, 
however, with Satajit, and cites a stanza which would seem to make 
Viraja the last of the descendants of Priyavrata. 

10. The descendants of Priyavrata were the kings of the earth in the first or 
Swayambhuva Manwantara. Those of Uttanapada, his brother, are placed 
rather incongruously in the second or Swarochisha Manwantara: whilst, 
with still more palpable inconsistency, Daksha, a descendant of 
Uttanapada, gives his daughter to Kasyapa in the seventh or Vaivaswata 
Manwantara. It seems probable that the patriarchal genealogies are older 
than the chronological system of Manwantaras and Kalpas, and have 
been rather clumsily distributed amongst the different periods. 





02. Chapter 


Description of the earth. The seven Dwipas and seven seas. Jambu-dwipa. 
Mount Mem: its extent and boundaries. Extent of Ilavrita. Groves, lakes, and 
branches of Meru. Cities of the gods. Rivers. The forms of Vishnu worshipped in 
different Varshas. 

MAITREYA.—You have related to me, Brahman, the creation of Swayambhuva; 
I am now desirous to hear from you a description of the earth: how many are its 
oceans and islands, its kingdoms and its mountains, its forests and rivers and the 
cities of the gods, its dimensions, its contents, its nature, and its form. 

PARASARA.—You shall hear, Maitreya, a brief account of the earth from me: a 
full detail I could not give you in a century. 

The seven great insular continents are Jambu, Plaksha, Salmali, Kusa, Krauncha, 
Saka, and Pushkara: and they are surrounded severally by seven great seas; the 
sea of salt water (Lavana), of sugar-cane juice (Ikshu), of wine (Sura), of 
clarified butter (Sarpi), of curds (Dadhi), of milk (Dugdha), and of fresh water 
(Jala). 

Jambu-dwipa is in the centre of all these: and in the centre of this continent is the 
golden mountain Meru. The height of Meru is eighty-four thousand Yojanas; and 
its depth below the surface of the earth is sixteen thousand. Its diameter at the 
summit is thirty-two thousand Yojanas; and at its base, sixteen thousand: so that 
this mountain is like the seed-cup of the lotus of the earth. 

_ r 

The boundary mountains (of the earth) are Himavan, Hemakuta, and Nishadha, 
which lie south of Meru; and Nila, Sweta, and Sringi, which are situated to the 
north of it. The two central ranges (those next to Meru, or Nishadha and Nila) 
extend for a hundred thousand (Yojanas, running east and west). Each of the 
others diminishes ten thousand Yojanas, as it lies more remote from the centre. 
They are two thousand Yojanas in height, and as many in breadth. The Varshas 
or countries between these ranges are Bharata (India), south of the Himavan 
mountains; next Kimpurusha, between Himavan and Hemakuta; north of the 


latter, and south of Nishadha, is Hariversha; north of Meru is Ramyaka, 
extending from the Nila or blue mountains to the Sweta (or white) mountains; 
Hiranmaya lies between the Sweta and Sringi ranges; and Uttarakuru is beyond 
the latter, following the same direction as Bharata. Each of these is nine 
thousand Yojanas in extent. Ilavrita is of similar dimensions, but in the centre of 
it is the golden mountain Meru, and the country extends nine thousand Yojanas 
in each direction from the four sides of the mountain. There are four mountains 
in this Varsha, formed as buttresses to Meru, each ten thousand Yojanas in 
elevation: that on the east is called Mandara; that on the south, Gandhamadana; 
that on the west, Vipula; and that on the north, Suparswa on each of these stands 

r 

severally a Kadamba-tree, a Jambu-tree, a Pipal, and a Vata each spreading over 
eleven hundred Yojanas, and towering aloft like banners on the mountains. From 
the Jambu-tree the insular continent Jambu-dwipa derives its appellations. The 
apples of that tree are as large as elephants: when they are rotten, they fall upon 
the crest of the mountain, and from their expressed juice is formed the Jambu 
river, the waters of which are drunk by the inhabitants; and in consequence of 
drinking of that stream, they pass their days in content and health, being subject 
neither to perspiration, to foul odours, to decrepitude, nor organic decay. The soil 
on the banks of the river, absorbing the Jambu juice, and being dried by gentle 
breezes, becomes the gold termed Jambunada, of which the ornaments of the 
Siddhas are fabricated. 

The country of Bhadraswa lies on the east of Meru, and Ketumala on the west; 
and between these two is the region of Ilavrita. On the east of the same is the 
forest Chaitraratha; the Gandhamadana wood is on the south; the forest of 
Vaibhraja is on the west; and the grove of Indra, or Nandana, is on the north. 
There are also four great lakes, the waters of which are partaken of by the gods, 
called Arunoda, Mahabhadra, Sltoda, and Manasa. 

The principal mountain ridges which project from the base of Meru, like 
filaments from the root of the lotus, are, on the east, Sitanta, Mukunda, Kurari, 

r r 

Malyavan, and Vaikanka; on the south, Trikuta, Sisira, Patanga, Ruchaka, and 
Nishadha; on the west, Sikhivasas, Vaidurya, Kapila, Gandhamadana, and 

r r 

Jarudhi; and on the north, Sankhakuta, Rishabha, Naga, Hansa, and Kalanjara. 
These and others extend from between the intervals in the body, or from the 
heart, of Meru. 



On the summit of Mem is the vast city of Brahma, extending fourteen thousand 
leagues, and renowned in heaven; and around it, in the cardinal points and the 
intermediate quarters, are situated the stately cities of Indra and the other regents 
of the spheres. The capital of Brahma is enclosed by the river Ganges, which, 
issuing from the foot of Vishnu, and washing the lunar orb, falls here from the 
skies, and, after encircling the city, divides into four mighty rivers, flowing in 
opposite directions. These rivers are the Sita, the Alakananda, the Chakshu, and 
the Bhadra. The first, falling upon the tops of the inferior mountains, on the east 
side of Meru, flows over their crests, and passes through the country of 
Bhadraswa to the ocean: the Alakananda flows south, to the country of Bharata, 
and, dividing into seven rivers on the way, falls into the sea: the Chakshu falls 
into the sea, after traversing all the western mountains, and passing through the 
country of Ketumala: and the Bhadra washes the country of the Uttara kurus, and 
empties itself into the northern ocean. 

Meru, then, is confined between the mountains Nila and Nishadha (on the north 
and south), and between Malyavan and Gandhamadana (on the west and east): it 
lies between them like the pericarp of a lotus. The countries of Bharata, 
Ketumala, Bhadraswa, and Uttarakuru lie, like leaves of the lotus of the world, 

r r 

exterior to the boundary mountains. Jathara and Devakuta are two mountain 
ranges, running north and south, and connecting the two chains of Nishadha and 
Nila. Gandhamadana and Kailasa extend, east and west, eighty Yojanas in 
breadth, from sea to sea. Nishadha and Pariyatra are the limitative mountains on 
the west, stretching, like those on the east, between the Nila and Nishadha 
ranges: and the mountains Trisringa and Jarudhi are the northern limits of Meru, 
extending, east and west, between the two seas. Thus I have repeated to you the 
mountains described by great sages as the boundary mountains, situated in pairs, 
on each of the four sides of Meru. Those also, which have been mentioned as the 
filament mountains (or spurs), Sitanta and the rest, are exceedingly delightful. 
The vallies embosomed amongst them are the favourite resorts of the Siddhas 
and Charanas: and there are situated upon them agreeable forests, and pleasant 
cities, embellished with the palaces of Vishnu, Lakshmi, Agni, Siirya, and other 
deities, and peopled by celestial spirits; whilst the Yakshas, Rakshasas, Daityas, 
and Danavas pursue their pastimes in the vales. These, in short, are the regions 
of Paradise, or Swarga, the seats of the righteous, and where the wicked do not 
arrive even after a hundred births. 



In the country of Bhadraswa, Vishnu resides as Hayasira (the horse-headed); in 
Ketumala, as Varaha (the boar); in Bharata, as the tortoise (Kurma); in Kuru, as 
the fish (Matsya); in his universal form, every where; for Hari pervades all 
places: he, Maitreya, is the supporter of all things; he is all things. In the eight 
realms of Kimpurusha and the rest (or all exclusive of Bharata) there is no 
sorrow, nor weariness, nor anxiety, nor hunger, nor apprehension; their 
inhabitants are exempt from all infirmity and pain, and live in uninterrupted 
enjoyment for ten or twelve thousand years. Indra never sends rain upon them, 
for the earth abounds with water. In those places there is no distinction of Krita, 
Treta, or any succession of ages. In each of these Varshas there are respectively 
seven principal ranges of mountains, from which, oh best of Brahmans, hundreds 
of rivers take their rise. 




Footnotes 

01. The geography of the Puranas occurs in most of these works; and in all 
the main features, the seven Dwipas, seven seas, the divisions of Jambu- 
dwipa, the situation and extent of Meru, and the subdivisions of Bharata, 
is the same. The Agni and Brahma are word for word the same with our 
text; and the Kurma, Linga, Matsya, Markandeya, and Vayu present 
many passages common to them and the Vishnu, or to one another. The 
Vayu, as usual, enters most fully into particulars. The Bhagavata differs 
in its nomenclature of the subordinate details from all, and is followed by 
the Padma. The others either omit the subject, or advert to it but briefly. 
The Mahabharata, Bhishma Parva, has an account essentially the same, 
and many of the stanzas are common to it and different Puranas. It does 
not follow the same order, and has some peculiarities; one of which is 
calling Jambu-dwipa, Sudarsana, such being the name of the Jambu-tree: 
it is said also to consist of two portions, called Pippala and Sasa, which 
are reflected in the lunar orb, as in a mirror. 

02. The shape of Meru, according to this description, is that of an inverted 
cone; and by the comparison to the seed-cup its form should be circular: 
but there seems to be some uncertainty upon this subject amongst the 
Pauranics. The Padma compares its form to the bell-shaped flower of the 


Dhatura. The Vayu represents it as having four sides of different colours; 
or, white on the east, yellow on the south, black on the west, and red on 
the north; but notices also various opinions of the outline of the 
mountain, which, according to Atri, had a hundred angles; to Bhrigu, a 
thousand: Savarni calls it octangular; Bhaguri, quadrangular; and 
Varshayani says it has a thousand angles: Galava makes it saucer-shaped; 
Garga, twisted, like braided hair; and others maintain that it is circular. 
The Linga makes its eastern face of the colour of the ruby; its southern, 
that of the lotus; its western, golden; and its northern, coral. The Matsya 
has the same colours as the Vayu, and both contain this line: 'Four- 
coloured, golden, four-cornered lofty:' but the Vayu compares its summit, 
in one place, to a saucer; and observes that its circumference must be 
thrice its diameter. The Matsya also, rather incompatibly, says the 
measurement is that of a circular form, but it is considered quadrangular. 
According to the Buddhists of Ceylon, Meru is said to be of the same 
diameter throughout. Those of Nepal conceive it to be shaped like a 
drum. A translation of the description of Meru and its surrounding 
mountains, contained in the Brahmarida, which is the same exactly as 
that in the Vayu, occurs in the As. Researches, VIII. 343. There are some 
differences in Col. Wilford's version from that which my MSS. would 
authorize, but they are not in general of much importance. Some, no 
doubt, depend upon variations in the readings of the different copies: of 
others, I must question the accuracy. 

03. This diminution is the necessary consequence of the diminished radius of 
the circle of Jambu-dwipa, as the mountain ranges recede from the 
centre. 

04. These, being the two outer Varshas, are said to take the form of a bow; 
that is, they are exteriorly convex, being segments of the circle. 

05. The whole diameter of Jambu-dwipa has been said to be 100,000 
Yojanas. This is thus divided from north to south: Ilavrita, in the centre, 
extends each way 9000, making 18000: Meru itself; at the base, is 16000: 
the six Varshas, at 9000 each, are equal to 54000: and the six ranges, at 
2000 each, are 12000: and 18 + 16 + 54 + 12 = 100. From east to west 
the Varshas are of the extent necessary to occupy the space of the circle. 

06. The Bhagavata and Padma call these Mandara, Merumandara, Suparswa, 
and Kumuda. 

07. Nauclea Kadamba, Eugenia Jambu, Ficus religiosa, and F. Indica. The 


Bhagavata substitutes a mango-tree for the Pipal; placing it on Mandara, 
the Jambu on Merumandara, the Kadamba on Suparswa, and the Vata on 
Kumuda. 

08. The Bhagavata substitutes Sarvatobhadra for the Gandhamadana forest; 
and calls the lakes, lakes of milk, honey, treacle, and sweet water. 

09. The Vayu gives these names, and many more; and describes at great 
length forests, lakes, and cities of gods and demigods upon these 
fabulous mountains, or in the valleys between them. (As. Res. VIII. 354.) 

10. The Lokapalas, or eight deities in that character, Indra, Yama, Varuria, 
Kuvera, Vivaswat, Soma, Agni, and Vayu. Other cities of the gods are 
placed upon the spurs, or filament mountains, by the Vayu; or that of 
Brahma on Hemasringa, of Sankara on Kalanjara, of Garuda on 
Vaikanka, and of Kuvera on Kailasa. Himavat is also specified by the 
same work as the scene of Siva's penance, and marriage with Uma; of his 
assuming the form of a Kirata, or forester: of the birth of Kartikeya, in 
the Sara forest; and of his dividing the mountain Krauncha with his spear. 
This latter legend, having been somewhat misunderstood by Col. 
Wilford, is made the theme of one of his fanciful verifications. "Here, he 
(the author of the Vayu) says, in the forest of Sankha, was born 
Shadanana or Kartikeya, Mars with six faces. Here he wished or formed 
the resolution of going to the mountains of Crauncha, Germany, part of 
Poland, &c. to rest and recreate himself after his fatigues in the wars of 
the gods with the giants. There, in the skirts of the mountains of 
Crauncha, he flung his sword; the very same which Attila, in the fifth 
century, asserted he had found under a clod of earth. It was placed in his 
tomb, where it is probably to be found." As. Res. VIII. 364. The text of 
which this is in part a representation is, ###. The legend here alluded to is 
told at length in the Vamana Purana. Mahishasura, flying from the battle, 
in which Taraka had been slain by Kartikeya, took refuge in a cave in the 
Krauncha mountain. A dispute arising between Kartikeya and Indra, as to 
their respective prowess, they determined to decide the question by 
circumambulating the mountain; the palm to be given to him who should 
first go round it. Disagreeing about the result, they appealed to the 
mountain, who untruly decided in favour of Indra. Kartikeya, to punish 
his injustice, hurled his lance at the mountain Krauncha, and pierced at 
once it and the demon Mahisha. Another division of Krauncha is ascribed 
to Parasurama. Megha Duta, v.59. Krauncha is also sometimes 



considered to be the name of an Asura, killed by Kartikeya; but this is 
perhaps some misapprehension of the Paurariic legend by the 
grammarians, springing out of the synonymes of Kartikeya, Kraunchari, 
Kraunchadararia, &c., implying the foe or destroyer of Krauncha, 
occurring in the Amara, and other Koshas. 

11. The Bhagavata is more circumstantial. The river flowed over the great 
toe of Vishnu's left foot, which had previously, as he lifted it up, made a 
fissure in the shell of the mundane egg, and thus gave entrance to the 
heavenly stream. The Vayu merely brings it from the lunar orb, and takes 
no notice of Vishnu's interposition. In a different passage it describes the 
detention of Ganga amidst the tresses of Siva, in order to correct her 
arrogance, until the divinity was moved by the penance and prayers of 
king Bhagiratha to set her free. The Mahabharata represents Siva's 
bearing the river for a hundred years on his head, merely to prevent its 
falling too suddenly on the mountains. 

12. Although the Vayu has this account, it subsequently inserts another, 
which is that also of the Matsya and Padma. In this the Ganges, after 
escaping from Siva, is said to have formed seven streams; the Nalini, 
Hladini, and Pavani going to the east; the Chakshu, Sita, and Sindhu to 
the wrest; and the Bhagirathi to the south. The Mahabharata calls them 
Vaswaukasara, Nalini, Pavani, Ganga, Sita, Sindhu, and Jambunadi. The 
more usual legend, however, is the first, and it offers some trace of actual 
geography. Mr. Faber, indeed, thinks that Meru, with the surrounding 
Varsha of Ilavrita, and its four rivers, is a representation of the garden of 
Eden. (Pagan Idolatry, I. 315.) However this may he, it seems not 
unlikely to have originated in some imperfect account of four great rivers 
flowing from the Himalaya, and the high lands north of that range, 
towards the cardinal points: the Bhadra, to the north, representing the 
Oby of Siberia; and the Sita, the river of China, or Hoangho. The 
Alakananda is well known as a main branch of the Ganges, near its 
source; and the Chakshus is very possibly, as Major Wilford supposed, 
the Oxus. (As. Res. VIII. 309.) The printed copy of the Bhagavata, and 
the MS. Padma, read Bankshu; but the former is the more usual reading. 
It is said, in the Vayu, of Ketumala, through which this river runs, that it 
is peopled by various races of barbarians. 

13. The text applies the latter name so variously as to cause confusion: it is 
given to one of the four buttresses of Meru, that on the south; to one of 


the filament mountains, on the west; to a range of boundary mountains, 
on the south; and to the Varsha of Ketumala: here another mountain 
range is intended, or a chain running north and south, upon the east of 
Ilavrita, connecting the Nila and Nishadha ranges. Accordingly the Vayu 
states it to be 34000 Yojanas in extent; that is, the diameter of Meru 
16000, and the breadth of Ilavrita on each side of it, or together 18000. A 
similar range, that of Malyavan, bounds Ilavrita on the west. It was 
probably to avoid the confusion arising from similarity of. nomenclature, 
that the author of the Bhagavata substituted different names for 
Gandhamadana in the other instances, calling the buttress, as we have 
seen, Merumandara; the southern forest, Sarvatobhadra; and the filament 
mountain, Hansa; restricting the term Gandhamadana to the eastern 
range: a correction, it may be remarked, corroborative of a subsequent 
date. 

14. These eight mountains are similarly enumerated in the Bhagavata and 
Vayu, but no mention is made in them of any seas, and it is clear that the 
eastern and western oceans cannot be intended, as the mountains 
Malyavat and Gandhamadana intervene. The commentator would seem 
to understand 'Arnava' as signifying 'mountain,' as he says between the 
seas means within Malyavat and Gandhamadana; The Bhagavata 
describes these eight mountains as circling Meru for 18000 Yojanas in 
each direction, leaving, according to the commentator, an interval of a 
thousand Yojanas between them and the base of the central mountain, 
and being 2000 high, and as many broad: they may be understood to be 
the exterior barriers of Meru, separating it from Ilavritta. The names of 

r r 

these mountains, according to the Bhagavata, are Jathara and Devakuta 
on the east, Pavana and Paripatra on the west, Trisringa and Makara on 
the north, and Kailasa and Karavlra on the south. Without believing it 
possible to verify the position of these different creations of the 
legendary geography of the Hindus, it can scarcely admit of doubt that 
the scheme was suggested by imperfect acquaintance with the actual 
character of the country, by the four great ranges, the Altai, Muztag or 
Thian-shan, Ku-en-nun, and Himalaya, which traverse central Asia in a 
direction from east to west, with a greater or less inclination from north 
to south, which are connected or divided by many lofty transverse ridges, 
which enclose several large lakes, and which give rise to the great rivers 
that water Siberia, China, Tartary, and Hindustan. (Humboldt on the 


mountains of Central Asia, and Ritter. Geogr. Asia.) 

15. More ample details of the Varshas are given in the Mahabharata, 
Bhagavata, Padma, Vayu, Kurma, Linga, Matsya, and Markandeya 
Puranas; but they are of an entirely fanciful nature. Thus of the 
Ketumala-varsha it is said, in the Vayu, the men are black, the women of 
the complexion of the lotus; the people subsist upon the fruit of the 
Panasa or jack-tree, and live for ten thousand years, exempt from sorrow 
or sickness: seven Kula or main ranges of mountains in it are named, and 
a long list of countries and rivers is added, none of which can be 
identified with any actually existing, except perhaps the greats river the 
Suchakshus, the Amu or Oxus. According to the Bhagavata, Vishnu is 
worshipped as Kamadeva in Ketumala. The Vayu says the object of 
adoration there is Iswara, the son of Brahma. Similar circumstances are 
asserted of the other Varshas. See also As. Res. VIII. 352. 




03. Chapter 


Description of Bharata-varsha: extent: chief mountains: nine divisions: principal 
rivers and mountains of Bharata proper: principal nations: superiority over other 
Varshas, especially as the seat of religious acts. (Topographical lists.) 

THE country that lies north of the ocean, and south of the snowy mountains, is 
called Bharata, for there dwelt the descendants of Bharata. It is nine thousand 
leagues in extent, and is the land of works, in consequence of which men go to 
heaven, or obtain emancipation. 

The seven main chains of mountains in Bharata are Mahendra, Malaya, Sahya, 
Suktimat, Riksha, Vindhya, and Paripatra. 

From this region heaven is obtained, or even, in some cases, liberation from 
existence; or men pass from hence into the condition of brutes, or fall into hell. 
Heaven, emancipation, a state in mid-air, or in the subterraneous realms, 
succeeds to existence here, and the world of acts is not the title of any other 
portion of the universe. 

The Varsha of Bharata is divided into nine portions, which I will name to you; 
they are Indra-dwipa, Kaserumat, Tamravarna, Gabhastimat, Naga-dwipa, 
Saumya, Gandharba, and Varuna; the last or ninth Dwipa is surrounded by the 
ocean, and is a thousand Yojanas from north to south. 

On the east of Bharata dwell the Kiratas (the barbarians); on the west, the 
Yavanas; in the centre reside Brahmans, Kshetriyas, Vaisyas, and Sudras, 
occupied in their respective duties of sacrifice, arms, trade, and service. 

The Satadru, Chandrabhaga, and other rivers, flow from the foot of Himalaya: 
the Vedasmriti and others from the Paripatra mountains: the Narmada and Surasa 
from the Vindhya hills: the Tapi, Payoshni, and Nirvindhya from the Riksha 
mountains; the Godaveri, Bhimarathi, Krishnaveni, and others, from the Sahya 
mountains: the Kritamala, Tamraparm, and others, from the Malaya hills: the 
Trisama, Rishikulya, &c. from the Mahendra: and the Rishikulya, Kumari, and 


others, from the Suktimat mountains. Of such as these, and of minor rivers, there 
is an infinite number; and many nations inhabit the countries on their borders. 

The principal nations of Bharata are the Kurus and Panchalas, in the middle 
districts: the people of Kamarupa, in the east: the Pundras, Kalingas, Magadhas, 

r 

and southern nations, are in the south: in the extreme west are the Saurashtras, 
Suras, Bhiras, Arbudas: the Karushas and Malavas, dwelling along the Paripatra 
mountains: the Sauviras, the Saindhavas, the Hunas, the Salwas, the people of 

r r 

Sakala, the Madras, the Ramas, the Ambashthas, and the Parasikas, and others. 
These nations drink of the water of the rivers above enumerated, and inhabit 
their borders, happy and prosperous. 

In the Bharata-varsha it is that the succession of four Yugas, or ages, the Krita, 
the Treta, the Dwapara, and Kali, takes place; that pious ascetics engage in 
rigorous penance; that devout men offer sacrifices; and that gifts are distributed; 
all for the sake of another world. In Jambu-dwipa, Vishnu, consisting of 
sacrifice, is worshipped, as the male of sacrificial rites, with sacrificial 
ceremonies: he is adored under other forms elsewhere. Bharata is therefore the 
best of the divisions of Jambu-dwipa, because it is the land of works: the others 
are places of enjoyment alone. It is only after many thousand births, and the 
aggregation of much merit, that living beings are sometimes born in Bharata as 
men. The gods themselves exclaim, "Happy are those who are born, even from 
the condition of gods, as men in Bharata-varsha, as that is the way to the 
pleasures of Paradise, or the greater blessing of final liberation. Happy are they 
who, consigning all the unheeded rewards of their acts to the supreme and 
eternal Vishnu, obtain existence in that land of works, as their path to him. We 
know not, when the acts that have obtained us heaven shall have been fully 
recompensed, where we shall renew corporeal confinement; but we know that 
those men are fortunate who are born with perfect faculties in Bharata-varsha." 

I have thus briefly described to you, Maitreya, the nine divisions of Jambu- 
dwipa, which is a hundred thousand Yojanas in extent, and which is encircled, as 
if by a bracelet, by the ocean of salt water, of similar dimensions. 





Footnotes 


01. As Bharata-varsha means India, a nearer approach to the truth, with 
regard to its extent, might have been expected; and the Vayu has another 
measurement, which is not much above twice the actual extent, or 1000 
Yojanas from Kumari (Comorin) to the source of the Ganges. 

02. These are called the Kula parvatas, family mountains, or mountain ranges 
or systems. They are similarly enumerated in all the authorities, and their 
situation may be determined with some confidence by the rivers which 
flow from them. Mahendra is the chain of hills that extends from Orissa 
and the northern Circars to Gondwana, part of which, near Ganjam, is 
still called Mahindra Malei, or hills of Mahindra: Malaya is the southern 
portion of the western Ghats: Suktimat is doubtful, for none of its 
streams can be identified with any certainty: Sahya is the northern 
portion of the western Ghauts, the mountains of the Konkan: Riksha is 
the mountains of Gondwana: Vindhya is the general name of the chain 
that stretches across central India, but it is here restricted to the eastern 
division; according to the Vayu it is the part south of the Narmada, or the 
Sathpura range: Paripatra, as frequently written Pariyatra, is the northern 
and western portion of the Vindhya: the name, indeed, is still given to a 
range of mountains in Guzerat (see Col. Tod's map of Rajasthan), but the 
Chambal and other rivers of Malwa, which are said to flow from the 
Pariyatra mountains, do not rise in that province. All these mountains 
therefore belong to one system, and are connected together. The 
classification seems to have been known to Ptolemy, as he specifies 
seven ranges of mountains, although his names do not correspond, with 
exception of the Vindus mons: of the others, the Adisathrus and Uxentus 
agree nearly in position with the Pariyatra and Riksha: the Apocopi, 
Sardonix, Bettigo, and Orudii must be left for consideration. The 
Bhagavata, Vayu, Padma, and Markarideya add a list of inferior 
mountains to these seven. 

03. This last is similarly left without a name in all the works: it is the most 
southerly, that on the borders of the sea, and no doubt intends India 
proper. Wilford places Isere a division called Kumarika. No description is 
anywhere attempted of the other divisions. To these the Vayu adds six 
minor Dwipas, which are situated beyond sea, and are islands, Anga- 


dwipa, Yama-d., Matsya-d., Kumuda or Kusa-d., Varaha-d., and Sankha- 
d.; peopled for the most part by Mlechchhas, but who worship Hindu 
divinities. The Bhagavata and Padma name eight such islands, 
Swarriaprastha, Chandrasukla, Avarttana, Ramanaka, Mandahara, 
Panchajanya, Sinhala, and Lanka. Col. Wilford has endeavoured to verify 
the first series of Upadwipas, making Varaha Europe; Kusa, Asia Minor, 
&c.; Sankha, Africa; Malaya, Malacca: Yama is undetermined; and by 
Anga, he says, they understand China. How all this may be is more than 
doubtful, for in the three Puranas in which mention is made of them, very 
little more is said upon the subject. 

04. By Kiratas, foresters and mountaineers are intended, the inhabitants to 
the present day of the mountains east of Hindustan. The Yavanas, on the 
west, may be either the Greeks of Bactria and the Punjab—to whom there 
can be little doubt the term was applied by the Hindus—or the 
Mohammedans, who succeeded them in a later period, and to whom it is 
now applied. The Vayu calls them both Mlechchhas, and also notices the 
admixture of barbarians with Hindus in India proper. The same passage, 
slightly varied, occurs in the Mahabharata: it is said especially of the 
mountainous districts, and may allude therefore to the Gonds and Bhils 
of central India, as well as to the Mohammedans of the north-west. The 
specification implies that infidels and outcastes had not yet descended on 
the plains of Hindustan. 

05. This is a very meagre list, compared with those given in other Puranas. 
That of the Vayu is translated by Col. Wilford, As. Res. vol. VIII; and 
much curious illustration of many of the places by the same writer 
occurs, As. Res. vol. XIV. The lists of the Mahabharata, Bhagavata, and 
Padma are given without any arrangement: those of the Vayu, Matsya, 
Markandeya, and Kurma are classed as in the text. Their lists are too long 
for insertion in this place. Of the rivers named in the text, most are 
capable of verification. The Satadru, 'the hundred channelled'—the 
Zaradrus of Ptolemy, Hesidrus of Pliny—is the Setlej. The Chandrabhaga, 
Sandabalis, or Acesines, is the Chinab. The Vedasmriti in the Vayu and 
Kurma is classed with the Vetravati or Betwa, the Charmanwati or 
Chambal, and Sipra and Para, rivers of Malwa, and may be the same with 
the Beos of the maps. The Narmada or Narbadda, the Namadus of 
Ptolemy, is well known; according to the Vayu it rises, not in the 
Vindhya, but in the Riksha mountains, taking its origin in fact in 


Gondwana. The Surasa is uncertain. The Tapi is the Tapti, rising also in 
Gondwana: the other two are not identified. The Godaveri preserves its 
name: in the other two we have the Beemah and the Krishna. For 
Kritamala the Kurma reads Ritumala, but neither is verified. The 
Tamraparni is in Tinivelly, and rises at the southern extremity of the 
western Ghats. The Rishikulya, that rises in the Mahendra mountain, is 
the Rasikulia or Rasikoila, which flows into the sea near Ganjam. The 
Trisama is undetermined. The text assigns another Rishikulya to the 
Suktimat mountains, but in all the other authorities the word is Rishika. 
The Kumari might suggest some connexion with Cape Comorin, but that 
the Malaya mountains seem to extend to the extreme south. A Rishikulya 
river is mentioned (Vana R v. 3026) as a Tirtha in the Mahabharata, in 

r 

connexion apparently with the hermitage of Vasishtha, which in another 
passage (v. 4096) is said to be on mount Arbuda or Abu. In that case, and 
if the reading of the text be admitted for the name of the river, the 
Suktimat range would be the mountains of Guzerat; but this is doubtful. 

06. The list of nations is as scanty as that of the rivers: it is, however, omitted 
altogether in the Bhagavata. The Padma has a long catalogue, but without 
arrangement; so has the Mahabharata. The lists of the Vayu, Matsya, and 
Markandeya class the nations as central, northern, eastern, southern, and 
western. The names are much the same in all, and are given in the 8th 
vol. of the As. Res. from the Brahmanda, or, for it is the same account, 
the Vayu. The Markandeya has a second classification, and, comparing 
Bharata-varsha to a tortoise, with its head to the east, enumerates the 
countries in the head, tail, flanks, and feet of the animal. It will be 
sufficient here to attempt an identification of the names in the text, but 
some further illustration is offered at the end of the chapter. The Kurus 
are the people of Kurukshetra, or the upper part of the Doab, about Delhi. 
The Panchalas, it appears from the Mahabharata, occupied the lower part 
of the Doab, extending across the Jumna to the Chambal. Kulluka Bhatta, 
in his commentary on Manu, II. 59, places them at Kanoj. Kamarupa is 
the north-eastern part of Bengal, and western portion of Asam. Puridra is 
Bengal proper, with part of south Behar and the Jungle Mahals. Kalinga 
is the sea-coast west of the mouths of the Ganges, with the upper part of 
the Coromandel coast. Magadha is Behar. The Saurashtras are the people 
of Surat, the Surastrene of Ptolemy. The Suras and Bhiras, in the same 
direction, may be the Suri and Phauni or Phryni of Strabo. The Arbudas 


must be the people about mount Abu, or the natives of Mewar. The 
Karushas and Malavas are of course the people of Malwa. The Sauvlras 
and Saindhavas are usually conjoined as the Sindhu-Sauviras, and must 
be the nations of Sindh and western Rajputana. By the Minas we are to 
understand the white Huns or Indo-Scythians, who were established in 
the Punjab and along the Indus at the commencement of our era, as we 
know from Arrian, Strabo, and Ptolemy, confirmed by recent discoveries 
of their coins, The Salwas or, as also read, Salyas are placed by the Vayu 
and Matsya amongst the central nations, and seem to have occupied part 
of Rajasthan, a Salwa Raja being elsewhere described as engaging in 
hostilities with the people of Dwaraka in Guzerat. Sakala, as I have 
elsewhere noticed, is a city in the Punjab (As. Res. XV. 108), the Sagala 
of Ptolemy (ibid. 107); the Mahabharata makes it the capital of the 
Madras, the Mardi of the ancients; but they are separately named in the 
text, and were situated something more to the south-east. The Ramas and 

r 

Ambashthas are not named in the other Purarias, but the latter are 
amongst the western, or more properly north-western nations subjugated 

r 

by Nakula, in his Dig-vijaya. Mahabh. Sabha P. Ambas and Ambashthas 
are included in the list extracted by Col. Wilford from the Varaha 
Sanhita, and the latter are supposed by him to be the Ambastae of Arrian. 
The Parasikas carry us into Persia, or that part of it adjoining to the 
Indus. As far as the enumeration of the text extends, it seems applicable 
to the political and geographical divisions of India about the era of 
Christianity. 

07. Enjoyment in Swarga, like punishment in Naraka, is only for a certain 
period, according to the merit or demerit of the individual. When the 
account is balanced, the man is born again amongst mankind. 

08. A crippled or mutilated person, or one whose organs are defective, cannot 
at once obtain liberation; his merits must first secure his being born again 
perfect and entire. 




Topographical Lists From The Mahabharata 


MOUNTAINS AND RIVERS. 

r 

SANJAYA speaks to Dhritarashtra.--Hear me, monarch, in reply to your 
inquiries, detail to you the particulars of the country of Bharata. Mahendra, 
Malaya, Sahya, Suktimat, Gandhamadana, Vindhya, and Paripatra are the seven 
mountain ranges: as subordinate portions of them are thousands of mountains; 
some unheard of, though lofty, extensive, and abrupt; and others better known, 
though of lesser elevation, and inhabited by people of low stature there pure and 
degraded tribes, mixed together, drink of the following streams: the stately 
Ganga, the Sindhu, and the Saraswati the Godavari, Narmada, and the great river 
Bahuda the Satadru, Chandrabhaga, and great river Yamuna; the Drishadwati, 
Vipasa, and Vipapa, with coarse sands; the Vetravati, the deep Krishhavehi, the 
Iravati, Vitasta, Pavoshni, and Devika the Vedasmrita, Vedavati, Tridiva, 
Ikshumalavi, Karishim, Chitrabaha, the deep Chitrasena, the Gomati, the 
Dhutapapa, and the great river Gandaki the Kausiki, Nischita, Kritya, Nichita, 
Lohatarini, Rahasya, Satakumbha, and also the Sarayu, the Charmanvati, 
Chandrabhaga, Hastisoma, Dis, Saravati, Payoshni, Para, and Bhimarathi, 
Kaveri, Chulaka, Vina, Satabala, Nivara, Mahita, Suprayoga Pavitra, Kundala, 
Sindhu, Rajani, Puramalini, Purvabhirama, Vira, Bhima, Oghavati, Palasini, 
Papahara, Mahendra, Patalavati, Karishini, Asikni, the great river Kusachira, the 
Makari, Pravara, Mena, Hema, and Dhritavati, Puravati, Anushna, Saivya, Kapi, 
Sadanira, Adhrishya, the great river Kusadhara, Sadakanta, Siva, Viravati, Vastu, 
Suvastu, Gauri, Kampana, Hiranvati, Vara, Virankara, Panchami, Rathachitra, 
Jyotiratha, Viswamitra, Kapinjala, Upendra, Bahula, Kuchira, Madhuvahini, 
Vinadi, Pinjala, Vena, Tungavena, Vidisa, Krishnavena, Tamra, Kapila, Selu, 
Suvama, Vedaswa, Harisrava, Mahopama, Sighra, Pichchhala, the deep 
Bharadwaji, the Kausiki, the Sona, Bahuda, and Chandrama, Durga, Amtrasila, 
Brahmabodhya, Vrihadvati, Yavaksha, Rohi, Jambunadi, Sunasa, Tamasa, Dasi, 
Vasa, Varana, Asi, Nala, Dhritamati, Purnasa, Tamasi, Vrishabha, 
Brahmamedhya, Vrihadvati. These and many other large streams, as the Krishna, 
whose waters are always salubrious, and the slow-flowing Mandavahini, the 
Brahmani, Mahagauri, Durga, Chitropala, Chitraratha, Manjula, Mandakini, 
Vaitarani, the great river Kosa, the Muktimati, Maninga, Pushpaveni, Utpalavati, 


Lohitya, Karatoya, Vrishakahwa, Kumari, Rishikulya, Marisha, Saraswati, 
Mandakini, Punya, Sarvasanga; all these, the universal mothers, productive of 
abundance, besides hundreds of inferior note, are the rivers of Bharata, 
according to remembrance. 

PEOPLE AND COUNTRIES. 

Next hear from me, descendant of Bharata, the names of the inhabitants of the 
different countries, They are the Kurus, Panchalas, Salwas, Madreyas, and 
dwellers in thickets (Jangalas), Siirasenas, Kalingas, Bodhas, Malas, Matsyas, 

r 

Sukutyas, Sauvalyas, Kuntalas, Kasikosalas, Chedyas, Matsyas, Karushas, 
Bhojas, Sindhupulindas, Uttamas, Dasarnas, Mekalas, Utkalas, Panchalas, 

_ r 

Kausijas, Naikaprishthas, Dhurandharas, Sodhas, Madrabhujingas, Kasis, 
Aparakasis, Jatharas, Kukuras, Dasarnas, Kuntis, Avantis, Aparakuntis, 
Goghnatas, Mandakas, Shandas, Vidarbhas, Rupavahikas, Aswakas, 

r r 

Pansurashtras, Goparashtras, Karitis, the people of Adhivajya, Kuladya, 

r 

Maharashtra, and Kerala the Varapasis, Apavarhas, Chakras, Vakratapas and 
Sakas, Videhas, Magadhas, Swakshas, Malayas, and Vijayas the Angas, Vangas, 
Kalingas and Yakrillomas, Mallas, Sudellas, Prahladas, Mahikasand Sasikas, 

r r 

Bahlikas, Vatadhanas, Abhiras and Kalajoshakas, Aparantas, Parantas, Pahnavas, 
Charmamandalas, Atavisikharas and Merubhutas, Upavrittas, Anupavrittas, 

r r r 

Swarashtras, Kekayas, Kuttaparantas, Maheyas, Kakshas, dwellers on the sea¬ 
shore, and the Andhas and many tribes residing within and without the hills; the 
Malajas, Magadhas, Manavarjjakas those north of the Mahi (Mahyuttaras), the 

r f 

Pravrisheyas, Bhargavas, Pundras, Bhargas, Kiratas, Sudeshtas; and the people 
on the Yamuna (Yamunas), Sakas, Nishadas, Nishadhas, Anarttas and those in 
the south-west (Nairritas), the Durgalas, Pratimasyas, Kuntalas, Kusalas, 
Tiragrahas, Surasenas, Ijikas, Kanyakagunas, Tilabaras, Samiras, Madhumattas, 
Sukandakas, Kasmiras, Sindhusauviras, Gandharas, Darsakas, Abhisaras, Utulas, 
Saivalas, and Bahlikas the people of Darvi, the Vanavas, Darvas, 
Vatajamarathorajas, Bahubadhas, Kauravyas, Sudamas, Sumallis, Badhnas, 
Karishakas, Kulindapatyakas, Vatayanas, Dasarnas, Romanas, Kusavindus, 
Kakshas, Gopala-kakshas, Jangalas, Kuruvarnakas, Kiratas, Barbaras, Siddhas, 
Vaidehas Tamraliptas, Audras, Paundras, dwellers in sandy tracts (Saisikatas), 
and in mountains (Parvatiyas). Moreover, chief of the sons of Bharata, there are 
the nations of the south, the Draviras, Keralas, Prachyas, Miishikas, and 
Vanavasakas the Karnatakas, Mahishakas, Vikalyas and Miishakas, Jillikas, 



r r 

Kuntalas, Sauhridas, Nalakananas, Kaukuttakas, Cholas, Kaunkanas, Malavanas, 
Samangas, Karakas, Kukkuras, Angaras, Dhwajinyutsavasanketas, Trigarttas, 

r r r 

Salwasenis, Sakas, Kokarakas, Proshtas, Samavegavasas. There are also the 
Vindhyachulukas, Pulindas and Kalkalas, Malavas, Mallavas, Aparavallabhas, 
Kulindas, Kalavas, Kunthakas, Karatas, Mushakas, Tanabalas, Saniyas, 
Ghatasrinjayas, Alindayas, Pasivatas, Tanayas, Sunayas, Dasividarbhas, 
Kantikas, Tanganas, Paratanganas, northern and other fierce barbarians 
(Mlechchhas), Yavanas, Chinas, Kambojas ferocious and uncivilized races, 
Sakridgrahas, Kulatthas, Hunas, and Parasikas also Ramanas, Chinas, 
Dasamalikas, those living near the Kshatriyas, and Vaisyas and Sudras also 

r r r r 

Sudras, Abhiras, Daradas, Kasmiras, with Pattis, Khasiras, Antacharas or 
borderers, Pahnavas, and dwellers in mountain caves (Girigahvaras), Atreyas, 
Bharadwajas, Stanayoshikas, Proshakas, Kalinga, and tribes of Kiratas, Tomaras, 
Hansamargas, and Karabhanjikas. These and many other nations, dwelling in the 
east and in the north, can be only thus briefly noticed. 


Footnotes 

01. In attempting to verify the places or people specified in the text, various 
difficulties are to be encountered, which must serve to apologize for but 
partial success. Some are inherent in the subject, such as the changes 
which have taken place in the topography of India since the lists were 
compiled, and the imperfectness of the specification itself: states and 
tribes and cities have disappeared, even from recollection, and some of 
the natural features of the country, especially the rivers, have undergone a 
total alteration. Buchanan (Description of Eastern Hindustan), following 
Rennell over the same ground at an interval of some thirty or forty years, 
remarks that many of the streams laid down in the Bengal Atlas (the only 
series of maps of India yet published, that can be regarded as of 
authority) are no longer to be traced. Then the lists which are given are 
such mere catalogues, that they afford no clue to verification beyond 
names; and names have been either changed or so corrupted, as to be no 
longer recognizable. On the other hand, much of the difficulty arises 
from our own want of knowledge. Scattered through the Puranas and 


other works, the names given in the topographical lists recur with 
circumstances which fix their locality; but these means of verification 
have not yet been sufficiently investigated. There are also geographical 
treatises in Sanscrit, which there is reason to believe afford much 
accurate and interesting information: they are not common. Col. Wilford 
speaks of having received a number from Jaypur, but upon his death they 
disappeared. After a considerable interval some of his MSS. were 
purchased for the Calcutta Sanscrit College, but by far the larger portion 
of his collection had been dispersed. A few leaves only on geographical 
subjects were found, from which I translated and published a chapter on 
the geography of some of the districts of Bengal: (Calcutta Quarterly 
Magazine, Dec. 1824:) the details were accurate and valuable, though the 
compilation was modern. Notwithstanding these impediments, however, 
we should be able to identify at least mountains and rivers to a much 
greater extent than is now practicable, if our maps were not so miserably 
defective in their nomenclature. None of our surveyors or geographers 
have been Oriental scholars. It may be doubted if any of them have been 
conversant with the spoken language of the country: they have 
consequently put down names at random, according to their own 
inaccurate appreciation of sounds carelessly, vulgarly, and corruptly 
uttered; and their maps of India are crowded with appellations which 
bear no similitude whatever either to past or present denominations. We 
need not wonder that we cannot discover Sanscrit names in English 
maps, when, in the immediate vicinity of Calcutta, Barnagore represents 
Varahanagar, Dakshineswar is metamorphosed into Duckinsore,and 
Ulubaria is Anglicised into Willoughbruy. Going a little farther off, we 
have Dalkisore for Darikeswari, Midnapore for Medinipur, and a most 
unnecessary accumulation of consonants in Caughmahry for Kakamari. 
There is scarcely a name in our Indian maps that does not afford proof of 
extreme indifference to accuracy in nomenclature, and of an 
incorrectness in estimating sounds, which is in some degree, perhaps, a 
national defect. 

02. The printed edition reads Saktimat, which is also found in some MSS., 
but the more usual reading is that of the text. I may here add that a 
Suktimat mountain occurs in Bhima's invasion of the eastern region. 
Mahabh. Sabha P. Gandhamadana here takes the place of Riksha. 

03. For additional mountains in the Vayu, see Asiatic Researches, VIII. 334 


The Bhagavata, Padma, and Markarideya add the following: Mainaka, 
which it appears from the Ramayaria is at the source of the Sone, that 
river being termed Mainakaprabhava. 'Kishkindhya Karida;' Trikuta, 

r 

called also in Hemachanchra's vocabulary Suvela; Rishabha, Kutaka, 
Konwa, Devagiri (Deogur or Ellora, the mountain of the gods; the 
Apocopi are said by Ptolemy to be also called mountains of the gods); 
Rishyamuka, in the Dekhin, where the Pampa rises; Sri-saila or Sri- 
parvata, near the Krishna (As. Res. V. 303); Venkata, the hill of Tripati, 
Varidhara, Mangala-prastha, Droria, Chitrakuta (Chitrakote in 
Bundelkhand), Govarddhana (near Mathura), Raivata, the range that 
branches off from the western portion of the Vindhya towards the north, 
extending nearly to the Jumna; according to Hemachandra it is the 
Giririara range; it is the Aravali of Tod; Kakubha, Nila (the blue 
mountains of Orissa), Gohamukha, Indrakila, Ramagiri (Ram-tek, near 
Nag-pur), Valakrama, Sudhama, Tungaprastha, Naga (the hills east of 
Ramghur), Bodhana, Pandara, Durjayanta, Arbuda (Abu in Guzerat), 

r 

Gomanta (in the western Ghats), Kutasaila, Kritasmara, and Chakora. 
Many single mountains are named in different works. 

04. See note 4. 

05. The Sarsuti, or Caggar or Gaggar, N. W. of Tahnesar. See below, note 6. 

06. The Bahuda is elsewhere said to rise in the Himalaya. Wilford considers 
it to be the Mahanada, which falls into the Ganges below Malda. The 
Mahabharata has amongst the Tirthas, or places of pilgrimage, two rivers 
of this name, one apparently near the Saraswati, one more to the east. 
Hemachandra gives as synonymes Arjuni and Saitavahini, both implying 
the 'white river:' a main feeder of the Mahanada is called Dhavali or 
Daub, which has the same meaning. 

07. The Drishadwati is a river of considerable importance in the history of 
the Hindus, although no traces of its ancient name exist. According to 
Manu it is one boundary of the district called Brahmavartta, in which the 
institution of castes, and their several duties, had for ever existed: 
implying that in other places they were of more recent origin. This holy 
land, 'made by the gods,' was of very limited extent. Its other boundary 
was the Saraswati. That the Drishadwati was not far off we learn from 
Manu, as Kurukshetra, Matsya, Panchala, and Surasena, or the upper part 
of the Doab, and country to the east, were not included in Brahmavartta; 

r r 

they constituted Brahmarshi-desa, contiguous to it: Kulluka Bhatta 


explains Anantara, 'something less or inferior;' but it more probably 
means 'not divided from,' 'immediately contiguous.' We must look for the 
Drishadwati, therefore, west of the Jumna. In the Tirtha Yatra of the 
Mahabharata we find it forming one of the boundaries of Kurukshetra. It 
is there said, 'Those who dwell on the south of the Saraswati, and north 
of the Drishadwati, or in Kurukshetra, dwell in heaven.' In the same 
place, the confluence of the Drishadwati with a stream of Kurukshetra, 
called the Kausiki, is said to be of peculiar sanctity. Kurukshetra is the 
country about Tahnesur or Sthaneswara, where a spot called Kurukhet 
still exists, and is visited in pilgrimage. The Kirin-kshetra of Manu may 
be intended for the country of the Kurus, in the more immediate vicinity 
of Delhi. According to Wilford, the Drishadwati is the Caggar; in which 
case our maps have taken the liberty of transposing the names of the 
rivers, as the Caggar now is the northern stream, and the Sursooty the 
southern, both rising in the Himalaya, and uniting to form one river, 
called Gagar or Caggar in the maps, but more correctly Sarsuti or 
Saraswati; which then runs south-west, and is lost in the desert. There 
have no doubt been considerable changes here, both in the nomenclature 
and in the courses of the rivers. 

08. The Beyah, Hyphasis, or Bibasis. 

09. The Ravi or Hydraotes or Adris. 

10. The Jhelum, but still called in Kashmir the Vitasta, the Bidaspes or 
Hydaspes. 

11. This river, according to the Vishnu P., rises from the Riksha mountains, 
but the Vayu and Kurma bring it from the Vindhya or Sathpura range. 
There are several indications of its position in the Mahabharata, but none 
very precise. Its source appears to be near that of the Krishna: it flows 
near the beginning of the Dandaka forest, which should place it rather 
near to the sources of the Godavari: it passes through Vidarbha or Berar, 
and, Yudhishthira having bathed in it, comes to the Vaidurya mountain 
and the Narmada river. These circumstances make it likely that the Payin 
Ganga is the river in question. 

12. The Deva, or Goggra. 

13. Both these are from the Paripatra range. In some MSS. the latter is read 
Vedasini and Vetasini. In the Ramayana occur Veda and Vedavainasika, 
which may be the same, as they seem to be in the direction of the Sone. 
One of them may be the Beos of eastern Malwa, but it rises in the Riksha 


mountain. 

14. From Paripatra, Kurma; from Mahendra, Vayu. 

15. One copy has Ikshumalini; two others, Ikshula and Krimi: one MS. of the 
Vayu has an Ikshula from Mahendra: the Matsya has Ikshuda; Wilford's 
list has Drakshala. 

16. Of these rivers, the two first are named in the Padma P., but not in the 
Vayu, &c. The Gomati in Oude, the Gandak, and the Kosi are well 
known. The Dhutapapa is said to rise in the Himalaya. 

17. In different MSS. read Michita and Nisrita. In the Vayu and Matsya, 
Nischira or Nirvira is said to flow from the Himalaya. 

18. Also Lohatararii and Lohacharim. 

19. The Sarayu or Sarju is commonly identified with the Deva. Wilford says 
it is so by the Paurariics, but we have here proof to the contrary. They are 
also distinguished by the people of the country. Although identical 
through great part of their course, they rise as different streams, and 
again divide and enter the Ganges by distinct branches. 

20. The recurrence of the same name in this, as in several similar subsequent 
instances, is possibly an error of the copyist; but it is also sometimes 
likely that one name is applied to different rivers. In one MS. we have, in 
place of this word, Chaitravati; and in another Vetravati. 

21. Read also Satavari. According to Wilford, the Saravati is the Ban-ganga. 

22. The Vayu has Para, which is a river in Malwa, the Parvati. MSS. read 
Varii and Vena. 

23. According to the Vayu, this rises in the Sahya m., and flows towards the 
south: it is therefore the Beema of Aurungabad. 

24. The Kaveri is well known, and has always borne the same appellation, 
being the Chaberis of Ptolemy. 

25. Read Chuluka. 

26. Read also Tapi; the Tapti river of the Dekhin. 

27. Read Ahita and Sahita. 

28. Rises in the Sahya mountain, and flows southwards: Vayu, &c. 

29. Read Vichitra. 

30. Several rivers are called by this name, as well as the Indus: there is one 
of some note, the Kali Sindh in Malwa. 

31. Also Vajini. 

32. This agrees best in name with the Beema: it is also mentioned as a tirtha 
in the Mahabharata. 


33. From Suktimat: Kurma and Vayu. There is a Balasan from the eastern 
portion of the Himalaya, a feeder of the Mahanada, which may be the 
Palasini, if the mountain be in this direction. 

34. Also Pippalalavati. The Vayu has a Pippala from the Riksha mountain. 

35. Also Kusavira. 

36. Also Mahika and Marundachi. 

37. Also Sena. 

38. Read Kritavati and Ghritavati. 

39. Also Dhusulya. 

40. Also Atikrishria. 

41. In place of both Suvarthachi. 

42. From Paripatra: Vayu and Matsya. 

43. Also Kusanara. 

44. Also Sasikanta. 

45. Also Vastra and Suvastra. 

46. One of the tirthas in the Mahabharata. 

47. According to the Mahabharata, this rises in the Vaidurya mountain, part 
of the southern Vindhya or Sathpura range. 

48. Also Kuvira. 

49. Three MSS. agree in reading this Ambuvahini. 

50. Also Vainadi. 

51. Also Kuvena: it is possibly meant for the Tungabhadra or Toombudra. 

52. A river in Malwa, so called from the city of the same name, which I have 
elsewhere conjectured to be Bhilsa. Megha Duta, 31. There is a 'Bess' 
river in the maps, which joins the Betwa at Bhilsa, and is probably the 
river of the text. 

53. The Varna or Suvama, 'the beautiful river,' Wilford identifies with the 
Ramganga. 

54. Also Mahapaga, 'the great river.' 

55. Also Kuchchila. 

56. The Sona river, rising in Mainaka or Amarakantak, and flowing east to 
the Ganges. 

57. This and the preceding both rise from the Vindhya mountain: the latter is 
also read Antassila, 'the river flowing within or amidst rocks.' 

58. Also Paroksha. 

59. We have a Surana in the Vayu, and Surasa in the Kurma and Matsya, 
flowing from the Riksha mountain. 


60. The Tamasa or Tonse, from Riksha. 

61. This and the preceding scarcely merit a place amongst the rivers, being 
two small streams which fall into the Ganges east and west of Benares, 
which is thence denominated Varanasi. 

62. Parriasa or Varriasa, from the Paripatra mountain. 

63. Also Manavi. 

64. The Krishna of the Dakhin is probably here intended, although its more 
ordinary designation seems to be that already specified, Krishriaveria or 
Krishriaverii. The meaning is much the same; the one being the 'dark 
river,' the other simply the 'dark,' the Niger. 

65. A river from Suktimat: Vayu. 

66. A river in Cuttack, according to Wilford: it is one of the tirthas of the 
Mahabharata, and apparently in a different direction. Buchanan (Eastern 
Hindustan) has a river of this name in Dinajpur. 

67. Both from the Vindhya: Vayu and Kurma. There is a Goaris in Ptolemy 
in central India. 

68. From Riksha: Vayu. 

69. Also Munja and Makaravahini. 

70. From Riksha: Vayu. According to the Mahabharata, it rises in the 
mountain Chitrakote. 

71. The Baitararii in Cuttack. It is named in the Mahabharata as a river of 
Kalinga. 

72. Also read Nipa and Koka. 

73. From Riksha, but read also Suktimati, which is the reading of the 
Matsya. Wilford considers it to be the Swarnarekka of Cuttack. 

74. Also Anaga and Suranga; perhaps the preferable reading should be 
Sumanga, a river .flowing from Mainaka, according to the Mahabharata. 

75. Part of the Brahmaputra. 

76. A considerable river in the east, flowing between Dinajpur and Rangpur. 

77. Also Vrishasahwa. 

78. This and the preceding flow from Suktimat, according to the Vayu, 
Matsya, and Kurma. The last occurs also Rishika. 

79. Also Suparria. The Punya is considered to be the Pun-pun of Behan, but 
there is also a Parna river in the same province. 

80. It is possible that further research will identify more than those attempted 
to be verified in the foregoing notes, as well as meet with others readily 
recognizable. In the authorities consulted several occur not 


comprehended in the text, as the Kuhu and Ikshu, from the Himalaya; 
Vritraghni, Chandana (Chandan of Bhagalpur), Mahi (the Mahy of 
western Malwa), Sipra, and Avanti (rivers near Ujayin), from Paripatra; 
Mahanada in Orissa, Druma, Dasarria (Dhosaun in Bundelkhand), 
Chitrakuta, Sroni or Syena, Pisachika, Banjula, Baluvahini, and Matkuria, 
all from Riksha; Nirvindhya, Madra, Nishadha, Sinibahu, Kumudvati, 
and Toya, from Vindhya; Banjula, from Sahya; Kritamala, Tamraparrii, 
Pushpajati, and Utpalavati, from Malaya; Langulini and Vansadhara, 
from Mahendra; and Mandaga and Kripa or Rupa, from Suktimat. In the 
Ramayaria we have, besides some already specified, the Ruchira, Pampa, 
eastern Saraswati, Vegavati or Vyki of Madura, and Varada or Wurda of 
Berar; and we have many others in the Mahabharata and different works, 
from which the Sanscrit appellations of most of the Indian rivers might 
be, with some little time and trouble, collected. 

81. The people of the upper part of the Doab. The two words might also be 
understood as denoting the Panchalas of the Kuru country, there being 
two divisions of the tribe: see below, note 20. 

82. The Surasenas were the inhabitants of Mathura, the Suraseni of Arrian. 

83. The people of the upper part of the Coromandel coast, well known in the 
traditions of the eastern Archipelago as Kling. Ptolemy has a city in that 
part called Caliga; and Pliny, Calingae proximi mari. 

84. One of the tribes of central India, according to the Vayu: it is also read 
Bahyas. 

85. The Malas and Malavarttis are placed, in the Vayu and Matsya, amongst 
the central nations. The Markarideya reads Gavavarttis. Wilford considers 
Mala to be the Mal-bhum of Medinipur. As noticed in the Megha Duta, I 
have supposed it to be situated in Chattisgarh. note. 

86. The people of Dinajpur, Rangpur, and Cooch Behar. Calcutta Mag. Dec. 
1824. 

87. Read Kusaridas, Kusalyas, Kusadhyas, Kisadhajas, and placed in central 
India. 

88. Also Sausalyas and Sausulyas. 

89. Kuntala is in one place one of the central countries; in another, one of the 
southern: the name is applied in inscriptions p. 186 to the province in 
which Curgode is situated, part of the Adoni district: (As. Res. IX. 427:) 
and consistently with this position it is placed amongst the dependant or 
allied states of Vidarbha in the Dada Kumara. Calcutta Quarterly Mag. 


Sept. 1827. 

90. A central nation: Vayu. The Ramayana places them in the east. The 
combination indicates the country between Benares and Oude. 

91. Chedi is usually considered as Chandail, on the west of the Jungle 
Mehals, towards Nagpur. It is known, in times subsequent to the Puranas, 
as Rariastambha. 

92. Some copies read Vatsa, and the other Puranas have such a name 
amongst the central countries; the people perhaps of Vatsa, Raja of 
Kausambhi, near the junction of the Jumna and the Ganges. There are, 
however, two Matsyas, one of which, according to the Yantra Samrat, is 
identifiable with Jaypur. In the Dig-vijaya of Nakula he subdues the 
Matsyas farther to the west, or in Guzerat. 

93. Situated on the back of the Vindhya range: Vayu and Matsya. They are 
generally named with the people of Malava, which confirms this locality. 
They are said to be the posterity of Karusha, one of the sons of 
Vaivaswata Manu. 

94. These are also placed along the Vindhya chain, but at different times 
appear to have occupied different positions. They were a kindred tribe 
with the Andhakas and Vrishriis, and a branch of the Yadavas. A Bhoja 
Raja is amongst the warriors of the Mahabharata. At a later period, 
Bhoja, the Raja of Dhar, preserves an indication of this people; and from 
him the Bhojpuris, a tribe still living in western Behar, profess to be 
descended: they are not improbably relics of the older tribe. Bhoja is also 
used sometimes as a synonyme of Bhojakata, a city near the Narmada, 
founded by Rukmi, brother-in-law of Krishna, and before that, prince of 
Kundiria or Condavir. 

95. Pulinda is applied to any wild or barbarous tribe; those here named are 
some of the people of the deserts along the Indus; but Pulindas are met 
with in many other positions, especially in the mountains and forests 
across central India, the haunts of the Bhils and Gonds. So Ptolemy 
places the Pulindai along the banks of the Narmada to the frontiers of 

r 

Larice; the Lata or Lar of the Hindus; Kandesh and part, of Guzerat. 

96. In the other three Puranas we have Uttamarrias, on the Vindhya range. 

97. The people of the 'ten forts,' subsequently multiplied to 'thirty-six,' such 
being the import of Chattisgerh, which seems to be in the site of Dasarria. 
Megha Duta, note. 

98. A Vindhya tribe, according to the other Puranas. The locality is 


confirmed by mythological personations; for Mekala is said to be a Rishi, 
the father of the river Narmada; thence called Mekala and Mekalakanya: 
the mountain where it rises is also called Mekaladri. The Ramayana 
places the Mekalas amongst the southern tribes. 

99. Utkala is still the native name of Orissa. 

100. These may be the southern Parichalas. When Droria overcame Drupada, 
king of Panchala, as related in the Mahabharata, Adi Parva, he retained 
half the country, that north of the Ganges, and restored to its former chief 
the other half, south of that river as far as to the Chambal. The capital of 
the latter became Makandi on the Ganges; and the country included also 
Kampilya, the Kampil of the Mohammedans, but placed by them in the 
Doab. The capital of the northern portion was Ahikshetra, a name 
traceable in the Adisathrus of Ptolemy, though the position differs: but 
Ahikshetra or Ahichchatra, as it is also written, seems to have been 
applied to more than one city. 

101. Perhaps the people of Tirhut, along the Kosi. 

102. 'Having more than one back;' probable some nickname or term of 
derision. Thus we have, in the Ramayana and other works, enumerated 
amongst tribes, the Karria-pravararias, 'those who wrap themselves up in 

r r 

their ears;' Ashta-karriakas, 'the eight-eared;' or Oshtha-karriakas, 'having 
lips extending to their ears;' Kakamukhas, 'crow-faced;' Ekapadukas, 
'one-footed,' or rather 'one-slippered:' exaggerations of national ugliness, 
or allusions to peculiar customs, which were not literally intended, 
although they may have furnished the Mandevilles of ancient and modern 
times with some of their monsters. The spirit of the nomenclature is 
shewn by these tribes being associated with Kiratas, 'barbarians,' and 
Yavanas, either Greeks or Mohammedans. 

103. A preferable reading seems to be Yugandhara: a city in the Punjab so 
called is mentioned in the Mahabharata, Kama P. 

104. Read Bodhas, Godhas, and Saudhas. There is a Rajput tribe called Sodha. 

105. This may consist of two names, and is so read in MSS., or the latter term 
occurs Kalingas; both terms are repeated. Besides the Machu of the 
north, a similar word,. Madru, is applied to Madura in the south. As. Res. 
IX. 428. The Ramayana has Madras in the east, as well as in the north. 

106. The people of the Benares district, and that opposite. 

107. The inhabitants of Ujayin. 

108. These should be opposite to the Kuntis, but where either is situated does 


not appear. 

109. The best reading is Gomanta, part of the Konkan about Goa. 

110. The more usual reading is Kharidas; one MS. has Parrias. 

111. A country of considerable extent and power at various periods. The name 
remains in Beder, which may have been the ancient capital; but the 
kingdom seems to have corresponded with the great part of Berar and 
Kandesh. It is mentioned in the Ramayana and the Puranas amongst the 
countries of the south. 

112. Also Rupavasikas. There is a Rupa river from the Suktimat mountain, the 
vicinity of which may be alluded to. We have Rupasas or Rupapas 
amongst the southern tribes of the Puranas. 

113. Read also Asmalas and Asmakas: the latter are enumerated amongst the 
people of the south in the Ramayana, and in the Vayu, Matsya, and 
Markarideya P. There is a prince of the same name of the solar dynasty. 

114. Gova or Kuva is an ancient name of the southern Konkan, and may be 
intended in this place by the Gopa country; or it may imply 'the district of 
cow-herds,' that is, of Nomadic tribes. 

115. Also read Kulatis and Pariitakas. 

116. Read also Adhirajya and Adhirashtra, which mean the same, 'the over or 
superior kingdom.' 

117. Also Kusadhya, Kusanda, and Mukuntha. 

r _ 

118. Also Vallirashtra. There are Mallas in the east, along the foot of the 
Himalaya, in Bhima's Dig-vijaya; but we should rather look for them in 
the north-west, in the site of the Malli of Arrian. We have in the Puranas, 

r 

Maharashtra, the Mahratta country, which may be here intended. 

119. Two copies read Kevala; one, Kambala, The text is probably wrong, as 
we have Kerala below. 

120. Also Varayasis and Varavasis: one copy has, what is likely to be most 
correct, Vanarasyas, the monkey-faced people.' 

121. Read Upavaha and Pravaha. 

122. The MSS. agree in reading this Vakra. 

123. The Sakas occur again, more than once, which may be possibly 
unnecessary repetition: but these people, the Sakai and Sacae of classical 
writers, the Indo-Scythians of Ptolemy, extended, about the 
commencement of our era, along the west of India, from the Hindu Koh 
to the mouths of the Indus. 

124. The inhabitants of Tirhut. 


125. The people of South Bahar. 

126. Also read Mahyas and Suhmas: the latter is probably correct. The 
Suhmas and Prasuhmas were found in the east by Bhlma; and Suhma is 
elsewhere said to be situated east of Bengal, towards the sea, the king 
and the people being Mlechchhas, that is not Hindus: it would correspond 
therefore with Tiperah and Aracan. 

127. Also read Malajas, but less correctly perhaps. The Malayas are the 
people of the southern Ghats. 

128. We have Pravijayas in the east, according to the Puranas. 

129. Anga is the country about Bhagalpur, of which Champa was the capital. 

130. Eastern Bengal. 

131. We have had these before, but they are repeated perhaps in conformity to 
the usual classification, which connects them with the two preceding, 
being derived in the genealogical lists from a common ancestor. 

132. In Bhima's Dig-vijaya we have two people of this name, both in the east; 
one along the foot of the Himalaya, and the other more to the south. 

133. Uniformly read in the MSS. Sudeshria. 

134. Three copies read Mahishas. We have Mahishakas amongst the southern 
people in the Puranas; and a Mahishiki in the Ramayana, also in the 
south: the latter may be connected with Mahishmati, which Sahadeva 
visits in his southern invasion, and which has been elsewhere conjectured 
to be in Mysur. (Calcutta Annual Register, 1822,) There is also a 
Mahishmati on the road to the south (Mahabh. Udyoga P.), which is 
commonly identified with Chuli Maheswar, on the Narmada. 

135. Also Rishikas; people placed by the Ramayana both in the north and in 
the south. Arjuna visits the former, and exacts from them eight horses. 
Dig-vijaya. 

136. Also read Bahikas, which we may here prefer, as the Bahlikas are 
subsequently named: the former are described in the Mahabharata, Kama 
Parva, with some detail, and comprehend the different nations of the 
Punjab, from the Setlej to the Indus. 

137. These are included amongst the northern nations; Vayu, &c.; but in 
Nakula's Dig-vijaya they are in the west. 

138. The Abhiras, according to the Puranas, are also in the north: in the 
Ramayana and Mahabh. Sabha P. they are in the west. The fact seems to 
be, that the people along the Indus, from Surat to the Himalaya, are often 
regarded as either western or northern nations, according to the 


topographical position of the writer: in either case the same tribes are 
intended. 

139. The MSS. read Kalatoyakas, a people placed by the Puranas in the north. 

140. The Vayu reads Aparitas, a northern nation. There are Aparytae in 
Herodotus, classed with a people bordering on India, the Gandari. The 
term in the text signifies also borderers,' and is probably correct, as 
opposed to the following word Parantas; the latter signifying those 
beyond, and the former those not beyond the borders. The latter has for 
Parantas, Paritas; and the Matsya, Paradas. 

141. Also Pahlavas, a northern or northwestern nation, often mentioned in 
Hindu writings, in Manu, the Ramayana, the Puranas, &c. They were not 
a Hindu people, and may have been some of the tribes between India and 
Persia. 

142. Also Charmakharidikas, but the sense is the same; those living in the 
district Maridala or Kharida of Charma: they are a northern people: Vayu, 
&c. Pliny mentions a king of a people so called, "Charmarum rex." 

143. Read Marubhaumas; more satisfactorily, as it means the inhabitants of 
Marubhumi, 'the desert;' the sands of Sindh. 

r 

144. Also Surashtras, which is no doubt more correct; the inhabitants of Surat. 

145. The Kekayas or Kaikeyas appear amongst the chief nations in the war of 
the Mahabharata, their king being a kinsman of Krishna. The Ramayana, 
II. 53, specifies their position beyond, or west of, the Vipasa. 

r r rr 

146. We have in the Puranas Kuttaprachararias and Kuttapravararias amongst 
the mountain tribes. 

147. These may be people upon the Mahi river: they are named amongst the 
southern nations by the Vayu, &c., but the west is evidently intended. 

148. Read also Kachchas: the Puraria have Kachchiyas. The form is equally 
applicable to people dwelling in districts contiguous to water and in 
marshy spots, and denotes the province still called Cutch. 

149. Also read Adhya, Antya, and Andhra: the latter is the name of Telingana, 
the Andhri of Pliny. 

150. Three MSS. have Malada, a people of the east in Bhima's Dig-vijaya. 

151. Also Manavalakas. 

152. A people of the east. 

153. The western provinces of Bengal, or, as sometimes used in a more 
comprehensive sense, it includes the following districts: Rajshahi, 
Dinajpur, and Rangpur; Nadiya, Birbhum, Burdwan, part of Midnapur, 


and the Jungle Mahals; Ramgerh, Pachete, Palamow, and part of Chunar. 
See an account of Puridra, translated from what is said to be part of the 
Brahmanda section of the Bhavishyat Purana. Calcutta Quart. Mag. Dec. 
1824. 

154. There is considerable variety in this term, Larga, Marja, Samuttara, and 
Samantara; probably neither is correct. Bhargas are amongst the people 
subdued in the east by Bhima. 

155. These are foresters and barbarians in general. 

156. Notwithstanding the celebrity of this country, as the kingdom of Nala, it 
does not appear exactly where it was situated: we may conclude it was 
not far from Vidharba (Berar) as that was the country of Damayanti. 
From the directions given by Nala to Damayanti, it is near the Vindhya 
mountain and Payoshm river, and roads lead from it across the Riksha 
mountain to Avanti and the south, as well as to Vidarbha and to Kosala. 
Nalopakhyana, sec. 9. 

157. These are always placed in the west: they are fabled to be the 
descendants of Anartta, the son of Saryati, who founded the capital 
Kusasthali afterwards Dwaraka, on the sea-shore in Guzerat. 

158. Also Pratimatsyas; those opposite or adjacent to the Matsyas. 

159. Also Kusajas and Kosalas; the latter is probably correct, as the name 
does not occur in any other form than that of Kasikosala above. Kosala is 
a name variously applied. Its earliest and most celebrated application is 
to the country on the banks of the Sar.ayu, the kingdom of Rama, of 
which Ayodhya was the capital. Ramayana, I. s. 5. In the Mahabharata 
we have one Kosala in the east, and another in the south, besides the 
Prak-kosalas and Uttara-kosalas in the east and north, The Puranas place 
the Kosalas amongst the people or the back of Vindhya;' and it would 
appear from the Vayu that Kusa, the son of Rama, transferred his 
kingdom to a more central position; he ruled over Kosala at his capital of 
Kusasthali or Kusavati, built upon the Vindhyan precipices: the same is 
alluded to in the Patala Khanda of the Padma Purana, and in the Raghu 
Vansa, for the purpose of explaining the return of Kusa to Ayodhya. 
Certainly in later times the country of Kosala lay south of Oude, for in 
the Ratnavali the general of Vatsa surrounds the king of Kosala in the 
Vindhya mountains: (Hindu Theatre, II. 305:) and, as noticed in the same 
work, we have in the Puranas, Sapta Kosalas, or seven Kosalas. An 
inscription found at Ratnapur in Chattisgarh, of which I have an 


unpublished translation, states that Sri-deva, the governor of Malahari 
Mandala, having obtained the favour of Prithwideva, king of Kosala, was 
enabled to build temples, and dig tanks, &c., indicating the extension of 
the power of Kosala across the Ganges in that direction. The inscription 
is dated Samvat 915, or A. D. 858. The Kosala of the Puranas and of the 
dramatic and poetic writers was however more to the west, along a part 
of the Vindhya range. Ptolemy has a Kontakossula in the south, probably 
one of the Kosalas of the Hindus. 

160. Also Itikas; perhaps the Ishikas or Aishikas of the Vayu, &c. a people of 
the south. 

161. The people of Kashmir. 

162. One of the chief tribes engaged in the war of the Mahabharata. The 
Ramayana places them in the west; the Puranas in the north. The term 
Sindhu shews their position to have been upon the Indus, apparently in 
the Punjab. 

163. These are also a people of the northwest, found both on the west of the 
Indus and in the Punjab, and well known to classical authors as the 
Gandarii and Gandaridae. As. Res. XV. 103; also Journal of the R. As. 
Soc.; Account of the Foe-kiie-ki. 

164. From the context this should probably be Darvakas, the people of a 
district usually specified in connexion with the succeeding. 

165. These are the inhabitants of the country bordering on Cashmir, to the 
south and west; known to the Greeks as the kingdom of Abisares. It often 
occurs in composition with Darya, as Darvabhisara. As. Res. XV. 24. 

166. Also read Ulutas and Kulutas: the Ramayana has Kolukas or Kaulutas 
amongst the western tribes. 

167. Also with the short vowel, Saivalas. 

168. The Vahlikas or Bahlikas are always associated with the people of the 
north, west, and ultra-Indian provinces, and are usually considered to 
represent the Bactrians, or people of Balkh. It is specified in the Mahabh. 
Udyoga P. as famous for its horses, a reputation the country bordering 
upon it, at least Bokhara and Maimena, still preserves: and in Arjuria's 
Dig-vijaya it is said to be difficult of approach. 

169. These are probably intended for the neighbours of the Abhisaras: they are 
found in the north by Arjuna, Dig-vijaya, and are there termed also 
Kshatriyas. 

170. Also read Bahubadhya and Bahurada. 


171. The name occurs in the Ramayaria as that of a mountain in the Punjab or 
in the Bahika country. II. 53. 

172. The MSS. agree in reading this Vanayava or Vanayus, a people in the 
northwest, also famous for horses. 

173. Abetter reading is Dasaparswa, as we have had Dasarrias before. 

174. Also Roparias; quere, Romans? 

175. Also Gachchas and Kachchas: the last is the best reading, although it has 
occurred before. 

176. Also Gopala-kachchas: they are amongst the eastern tribes in Bhima's 
Dig-vijaya. 

177. Or Langalas. 

178. Kurujangalas, or the people of the forests in the upper part of the Doab: it 
is also read Paravallabhas. 

179. The analogy to 'barbarians' is not in sound only, but in all the authorities 
these are classed with borderers and foreigners and nations not Hindu. 

180. Also Dahas, in which we should have a resemblance to the Scythian 
Dahae. 

181. Or Tamaliptas or Damaliptas; the people at the western mouth of the 
Ganges in Medinipur and Tamluk. Tamralipti was a celebrated sea-port 
in the fourth century, (Account of the Poe-kiie-ki,) and retained its 
character in the ninth and twelfth. Dasa Kumara Charitra and Vrihat 
Katha; also Journ. Royal As. Soc. 

182. The people of Odra or Orissa. 

183. The inhabitants of Puridra: see note 73. 

184. The people of the Coromandel coast, from Madras southwards; those by 
whom the Tamil language is spoken. 

185. The people of Malabar proper. 

186. Also Prasyas. Prachyas properly means the people of the east, the Prasii 
of the Greeks, east of the Ganges. 

187. Mushika is the southernmost part of the Malabar coast, Cochin and 
Travancore. 

188. Also Vanavasinas and Vanavasikas; the inhabitants of Banawasi, the 
Banavasi of Ptolemy, a town the remains of which are still extant in the 
district of Sunda. 

189. The people of the centre of the Peninsula, the proper Kernata or Carnatie. 

190. The people of Mysore: see note 54. 

191. Also Vikalpas. 


192. Also Pushkalas, 

193. Also Karriikas. 

194. Read Kuntikas. 

195. Variously read Nalakalaka, Nabhakanana, and Tilakanija. 

196. Kaukundaka and Kaukuntaka. 

197. The inhabitants of the lower part of the Coromandel coast; so called after 
them Chola-maridala. 

198. People of the Konkan: according to some statements there are seven 
districts so named. 

199. Malavanara and Salavariaka. 

200. These two words are sometimes compounded as Kukkurangara: it is also 
read Kanurajada. 

201. This is a questionable name, though the MSS. agree. We have in Arjuna's 
Dig-vijaya, Utsavamanketa; and in Nakula's, to the west, Utsavasanketa. 

202. These are amongst the warriors of the Mahabharata; they are included in 
all the lists amongst the northern tribes, and are mentioned in the 
Rajatarangini as not far from Kashmir: they are considered to be the 
people of Lahone. 

203. Also Vyukas and Vrikas: the latter are specified amongst the central 
nations: Vayu, &c. 

204. Kokavakas and Kokanakhas. 

205. Saras and Vegasaras; also Parasancharakas. 

206. Vindhyapalakas and Vindhyamulikas: the latter, those at the foot of 
Vindhya, are named in the Paurariik lists amongst the southern tribes. 

207. Balwala and Valkaja. 

208. Also Malaka and Majava. 

209. Also Vallabhas, which from the succeeding word may be conjectured to 
be correct. A city named Vallabhi makes a great figure in the traditions of 
Rajputana. See Tod's Rajasthan. 

210. One of the tribes in the west or north-west subdued by Arjuna. 

211. Kalada and Dohada. 

r 

212. Kundala, Karantha, and Maridaka: the latter occurs in the Ramayaria 
amongst the eastern nations. 

213. Kurata, Kunaka. 

214. Stanabala. 

215. Satirtha, Satiya, Nariya. 

216. The Srinjayas are a people from the north-west amongst the warriors of 


the Mahabharata: the reading may be incorrect. It occurs also 
Putisrinjaya. 

217. Also Aninda. 

218. Also Sivata, Sirala, Syuvaka. 

219. Tanapa, Stanapa, Sutapa. 

220. Pallipanjaka and Vidarbha. 

221. Dadhividarbha, but three copies have Rishika. Great variety, and no 
doubt great inaccuracy, prevails in the MSS. in several of the names ]sere 
given: they are not found elsewhere. 

222. The reading of three copies is Kakas: there is a tribe so called on the 
banks of the Indus, as it leaves the mountains. 

223. These and the following are mountaineers in the north-west. The former 
are placed by the Puranas in the north, and the Vayu includes them also 
amongst the mountain tribes. The Ramayana has Tankanas in the north. 

224. The term Yavanas, although in later times applied to the Mohammedans, 
designated formerly the Greeks, as observed in the valuable notes on the 
translation of the Birth of Uma, from the Kumara Sambhava. (Journal As. 
Soc. of Bengal, July 1833.) The Greeks were known throughout western 
Asia by the term |1’ 1, Yavan; or Ion, ’Iaovec;; the Yavana, ###, of the 
Hindus; or as it occurs in its Prakrit form, in the very curious inscription 
decyphered by Mr. Prinsep, (J. As. Soc. Beng. Feb. 1838,) Yona: the term 
Yona Raja being there associated with the name Antiochus, in all 
likelihood Antiochus the Great, the ally of the Indian prince 
Sophagasenas, about B. C. 210. That the Macedonian or Bactrian Greeks 
were most usually intended is not only probable from their position and 
relations with India, but from their being usually named in concurrence 
with the north-western tribes, Kambojas, Daradas, Paradas, Bahlikas, 
Sakas, &c. in the Ramayana, Mahabharata, Puranas, Manu, and in 
various poems and plays. 

225. Chinas, or Chinese, or rather the people of Chinese Tartary, are named in 
the Ramayana and Manu, as well as in the Puranas. If the designation 
China was derived from the Tsin dynasty, which commenced B. C. 260, 
this forms a limit of antiquity for the works in question. The same word 
however, or Tsin, was the ancient appellation of the northern province of 
Shen-sy, and it may have reached the Hindus from thence at an earlier 
period. 

226. These Wilford regards as the people of Arachosia. They are always 



mentioned together with the north-western tribes, Yavanas, Sakas, and 
the like: they are also famous for their hoses; and in the Ramayana they 
are said to be covered with golden lotuses. What is meant is doubtful, 
probably some ornament or embellishment of their dress. We have part of 
the name, or Kambi, in the Cambistholi of Arrian: the last two syllables, 
no doubt, represent the Sanscrit Sthala, 'place,' 'district;' and the word 
denotes the dwellers in the Kamba or Kambis country: so Kamboja may 
be explained those born in Kamba or Kambas. 

227. Also Sakridvaha or Sakridguha. 

228. Also Kulachchas and Kuntalas: the Puranas have Kupathas amongst the 
mountain tribes. 

229. Also Parataka: the first is not a common form in the Puranas, although it 
is in poetical writings, denoting, no doubt, the Persians, or people of Pars 
or Fars: the latter, also read Paradas, may imply the same, as beyond 
(Para) the Indus. 

230. We have Ramathas in Nakula's Dig-vijaya, and in the Vayu and Matsya. 

231. Dasamanas and Desamanikas, in the north: Vayu and Matsya. 

232. The passage occurs in the Vayu and Markandeya Puranas, as well as in 
the Mahabharata; but the purport is not very distinct, and the proper 
reading is doubtful. In three MSS. of the latter it occurs ### the latter 
pada is the same in all: the former, is ### in a fourth copy, in two copies 
of the Vayu it is ###. None of these are intelligible, and the Markandeya 
furnishes the reading followed, Modern geographers have supposed the 
Cathaei, Cathari, and Chatriaei of the ancients, in the lower parts of the 
Punjab, to mean a people of Kshatriyas; but no such people occur 
directly named in our lists. Considering that the text is speaking of 
barbarous and foreign tribes, perhaps no particular nation is here meant, 
and it may be intended as an epithet of those which follow, or of Vaisya 
(agricultural) and Sudra (servile or low) tribes, living either near to, or 
after the manner of Kshatriyas: in that case a better reading would be, 
###. According to Manu, various northern tribes, the Sakas, Kambojas, 
Paradas, Pahlavas, Kiratas, Daradas, and Khasas, and even the Chinas 
and Yavanas, are degraded Kshatriyas, in consequence of neglecting 
religious rites. X. 43, 44. According to the Pauranik legend they were 
overcome in war by Sagara, and degraded from their original caste. See 
book IV. 

233. Here we have a people called Sudras by all the authorities, and placed in 





the west or north-west, towards the Indus. They have been ingeniously, 
and with probability, conjectured by Mr. Lassen to be the Oxydracae; for 
Sudraka is equally correct with Sudra; and in place of ’O^uSpaKai various 
MSS. of Strabo, as quoted by Siebenkees, read ZiSpaxai and SuSpdKai: 
the latter is precisely the Sanscrit appellation. Pliny also has Sudraci for 
the people who formed the limit of Alexander's eastern conquests, or 
those hitherto inaccurately called Oxydracae. 

234. These are always conjoined with the Sudras, as if conterminous. Their 
situation is no doubt correctly indicated by Ptolemy by the position of 
Abiria above Pattalene on the Indus. 

235. The Durds are still where they were at the date of our text, and in the 
days of Strabo and Ptolemy; not exactly, indeed, at the sources of the 
Indus, but along its course, above the Himalaya, just before it descends to 
India; a position which might well be taken for its head. 

236. Also read Pasus, 'brutes.' If the term might be altered to Palli, it would 
imply 'village or pastoral tribes.' 

237. Also Khasikas and Khasakas. The first of these is probably most correct, 
being equivalent to Khasas, barbarians named along with the Sakas and 
Daradas by Manu, &c.; traces of whom may be sought amongst the 
barbarous tribes on the north-east of Bengal, the Kasiyas; or it has been 
thought that they may be referred to the situation of Kashgar. Two copies 
have, in place of this, Tukharas, and the same occurs in the Ramayana; 
the Vayu has Tusharas, but the Markandeya, Tukhara: these are probably 
the Tochari, Tachari, or Thogari, a tribe of the Sakas, by whom Bactria 
was taken from the Greeks, and from whom Tocharestan derives the 
name it still bears. 

238. Also Pahlavas and Pallavas. The form in the text is the more usual. 

239. The Ramayana has Gahvaras. The mountains from Kabul to Bamian 
furnish infinitely numerous instances of cavern habitations. 

240. These two, according to the Vayu, are amongst the northern nations; but 
they might be thought to be religious fraternities, from the sages Atri and 
Bharadwaja. 

241. The latter member of the compound occurs poshikas, payikas, and 
yodhikas, 'cherishers,' 'drinkers,' or 'fighters:' the first term denotes the 
female breast. 

242. Also Dronakas, 'people of vallies.' 

243. Also Kajingas. Kalingas would be here out of place. 


244. These and the preceding are included by the Vayu amongst the mountain 
tribes of the north. 

245. Many names indeed might be added to the catalogue from the lists 
referred to in the Vayu, Matsya, and Markarideya Purarias, as well as 
several capable of verification from the Ramayaria, and other passages of 
the Mahabharata. This is not the place however to exhaust the subject, 
and it has been prosecuted too far perhaps already. It is evident that a 
very considerable proportion of the names recorded can be verified, and 
that many of them may be traced in the geographical notices of India left 
by the historians of Alexander's expedition. That more cannot be 
identified is owing in a great measure to incomplete research; and a more 
extensive examination of the authorities would no doubt discover 
passages where circumstances, as well as names, are given by which the 
places would be recognised. It is evident, however, that much 
embarrassment also arises from the inaccuracy of manuscripts, which 
vary widely and irreconcilably. I have given instances from four different 
copies of the text; one in my own possession, three in the library of the 
East India Company; all very excellent copies, but manifestly erroneous 
in many respects in their nomenclature of places, and particularly of 
those which are least known. No assistance is to be had from any 
commentary, as the subject is one of little interest in native estimation. 




04. Chapter 


Account of kings, divisions, mountains, rivers, and inhabitants of the other 
Dwipas, viz. Plaksha, Salmala, Kusa, Krauncha, Saka, and Pushkara: of the 
oceans separating them: of the tides: of the confines of the earth: the Lokaloka 
mountain. Extent of the whole. 

IN the same manner as Jambu-dwipa is girt round about by the ocean of salt 
water, so that ocean is surrounded by the insular continent of Plaksha; the extent 
of which is twice that of Jambu-dwipa. 

Medhatithi, who was made sovereign of Plaksha, had seven sons, Santabhaya, 
Sisira, Sukhodaya, Ananda, Siva, Kshemaka, and Dhruva; and the Dwipa was 
divided amongst them, and each division was named after the prince to whom it 
was subject. The several kingdoms were bounded by as many ranges of 
mountains, named severally Gomeda, Chandra, Narada, Dundubhi, Somaka, 
Sumanas, and Vaibhraja. In these mountains the sinless inhabitants ever dwell 
along with celestial spirits and gods: in them are many holy places; and the 
people there live for a long period, exempt from care and pain, and enjoying 
uninterrupted felicity. There are also, in the seven divisions of Plaksha, seven 
rivers, flowing to the sea, whose names alone are sufficient to take away sin: 
they are the Anutapta, Sikhi, Vipasa, Tridiva, Kramu, Amrita, and Sukrita. These 
are the chief rivers and mountains of Plaksha-dwipa, which I have enumerated to 
you; but there are thousands of others of inferior magnitude. The people who 
drink of the waters of those rivers are always contented and happy, and there is 
neither decrease nor increase amongst them, neither are the revolutions of the 
four ages known in these Varshas: the character of the time is there uniformly 
that of the Treta (or silver) age. In the five Dwipas, worthy Brahman, from 
Plaksha to Saka, the length of life is five thousand years, and religious merit is 
divided amongst the several castes and orders of the people. The castes are 
called Aryaka, Kuru, Vivasa, and Bhavi, corresponding severally with Brahman, 
Kshetriya, Vaisya, and Sudra. In this Dwipa is a large fig-tree (F. religiosa), of 
similar size as the Jambu-tree of Jambu-dwipa; and this Dwipa is called Plaksha, 
after the name of the tree. Hari, who is all, and the creator of all, is worshipped 
in this continent in the form of Soma (the moon). Plaksha-dwipa is surrounded, 


as by a disc, by the sea of molasses, of the same extent as the land. Such, 
Maitreya, is a brief description of Plaksha-dwipa. 

The hero Vapushmat was king of the next or Salmala-dwipa, whose seven sons 
also gave designations to seven Varshas, or divisions. Their names were Sweta, 
Harita, Jimuta, Rohita, Vaidyuta, Manasa, and Suprabha. The Ikshu sea is 
encompassed by the continent of Salmala, which is twice its extent. There are 
seven principal mountain ranges, abounding in precious gems, and dividing the 
Varshas from each other; and there are also seven chief rivers. The mountains are 
called Kumuda, Unnata, Valahaka, Drona, fertile in medicinal herbs, Kanka, 
Mahisha, and Kakkudwat. The rivers are Yauni, Toya, Vitrishria, Chandra, Sukla, 
Vimochani, and Nivritti; all whose waters cleanse away sins. The Brahmans, 
Kshetriyas, Vaisyas, and Sudras of this Dwipa, called severally Kapilas, Arunas, 
Pitas, and Rohitas (or tawny, purple, yellow, and red), worship the imperishable 
soul of all things, Vishnu, in the form of Vayu (wind), with pious rites, and enjoy 
frequent association with the gods. A large Salmali (silk-cotton) tree grows in 
this Dwipa, and gives it its name. The Dwipa is surrounded by the Sura sea (sea 
of wine), of the same extent as itself. 

The Sura sea is entirely encircled by Kusa-dwipa, which is every way twice the 
size of the preceding continent. The king, Jyotishmat, had seven sons, Udbhida, 
Venuman, Swairatha, Lavana, Dhriti, Prabhakara, and Kapila, after whom the 
seven portions or Varshas of the island were called Udbhida, &c. There reside 
mankind along with Daityas and Danavas, as well as with spirits of heaven and 
gods. The four castes, assiduously devoted to their respective duties, are termed 
Damis, Sushmis, Snehas, and Mandehas, who, in order to be relieved of the 
obligations imposed upon them in the discharge of their several functions, 
worship Janarddana, in the form of Brahma, and thus get rid of the unpleasant 
duties which lead to temporal rewards. The seven principal mountains in this 
Dwipa are named Vidruma, Hemasaila, Dyutiman, Pushpavan, Kusesaya, Hari, 
and Mandara; and the seven rivers are Dhutapapa, Siva, Pavitra, Sammati, 
Vidyudambha, Mahhvanya, Sarvapapahara: besides these, there are numerous 
rivers and mountains of less importance. Kusa-dwipa is so named from a clump 
of Kusa grass (Poa) growing there. It is surrounded by the Ghrita sea (the sea of 
butter), of the same size as the continent. 


The sea of Ghrita is encompassed by Krauncha-dwipa, which is twice as large as 



Kusa-dwipa. The king of this Dwipa was Dyutiman, whose sons, and the seven 
Varshas named after them, were Kusala, Mallaga, Ushria, Pivara, Andhakaraka, 
Muni, and Dundubhi. The seven boundary mountains, pleasing to gods and 
celestial spirits, are Krauncha, Vamana, Andhakaraka, Devavrit, Puridarikavan, 
Dundubhi, and Mahasaila; each of which is in succession twice as lofty as the 
series that precedes it, in the same manner as each Dwipa is twice as extensive as 
the one before it. The inhabitants reside there without apprehension, associating 
with the bands of divinities. The Brahmans are called Pushkaras; the Kshetriyas, 
Pushkalas: the Vaisyas are termed Dhanyas; and the Sudras, Tishyas. They drink 
of countless streams, of which the principal are denominated Gauri, Kumudwati, 
Sandhya, Ratri, Manojava, Kshanti, and Puridarika. The divine Vishnu, the 
protector of mankind, is worshipped there by the people, with holy rites, in the 
form of Rudra. Krauncha is surrounded by the sea of curds, of a similar extent; 
and that again is encompassed by Saka-dwipa. 

The sons of Bhavya, the king of Saka-dwipa, after whom its Varshas were 
denominated, were Jalada, Kumara, Sukumara, Manichaka, Kusumoda, 
Maudaki, and Mahadruma. The seven mountains separating the countries were 
Udayagiri, Jaladhara, Raivataka, Syama, Ambikeya, Ramya, and Kesari. There 
grows a large Saka (Teak) tree, frequented by the Siddhas and Gandharbas, the 
wind from which, as produced by its fluttering leaves, diffuses delight. The 
sacred lands of this continent are peopled by the four castes. Its seven holy 
rivers, that wash away all sin, are the Sukumari, Kumari, Nalini, Dhenuka, 
Ikshu, Venuka, and Gabhasti. There are also hundreds and thousands of minor 
streams and mountains in this Dwipa: and the inhabitants of Jalada and the other 
divisions drink of those waters with pleasure, after they have returned to earth 
from Indra's heaven. In those seven districts there is no dereliction of virtue; 
there is no contention; there is no deviation from rectitude. The caste of Mriga is 
that of the Brahman; the Magadha, of the Kshetriya; the Manasa, of the Vaisya; 
and the Mandaga of the Sudra: and by these Vishnu is devoutly worshipped as 
the sun, with appropriate ceremonies. Saka-dwipa is encircled by the sea of milk, 
as by an armlet, and the sea is of the same breadth as the continent which it 
embraces The Kshiroda ocean (or sea of milk) is encompassed by the seventh 
Dwipa, or Pushkara, which is twice the size of Saka-dwipa. Savana, who was 
made its sovereign, had but two sons, Mahavira and Dhataki, after whom the two 
Varshas of Pushkara were so named. These are divided by one mighty range of 
mountains, called Manasottara, which runs in a circular direction (forming an 



outer and an inner circle). This mountain is fifty thousand Yojanas in height, and 
as many in its breadth; dividing the Dwipa in the middle, as if with a bracelet, 
into two divisions, which are also of a circular form, like the mountain that 
separates them. Of these two, the Mahavira-varsha is exterior to the 
circumference of Manasottara, and Dhataki lies within the circle; and both are 
frequented by heavenly spirits and gods. There are no other mountains in 
Pushkara, neither are there any rivers. Men in this Dwipa live a thousand years, 
free from sickness and sorrow, and unruffled by anger or affection. There is 
neither virtue nor vice, killer nor slain: there is no jealousy, envy, fear, hatred, 
covetousness, nor any moral defect: neither is there truth or falsehood. Food is 
spontaneously produced there, and all the inhabitants feed upon viands of every 
flavour. Men there are indeed of the same nature with gods, and of the same 
form and habits. There is no distinction of caste or order; there are no fixed 
institutes; nor are rites performed for the sake of advantage. The three Vedas, the 
Purarias, ethics, and polity, and the laws of service, are unknown. Pushkara is in 
fact, in both its divisions, a terrestrial paradise, where time yields happiness to 
all its inhabitants, who are exempt from sickness and decay. A Nyagrodha-tree 
(Ficus indica) grows on this Dwipa, which is the especial abode of Brahma, and 
he resides in it, adored by the gods and demons. Pushkara is surrounded by the 
sea of fresh water, which is of equal extent with the continent it invests. 

In this manner the seven island continents are encompassed successively by the 
seven oceans, and each ocean and continent is respectively of twice the extent of 
that which precedes it. In all the oceans the water remains at all times the same 
in quantity, and never, increases or diminishes; but like the water in a caldron, 
which, in consequence of its combination with heat, expands, so the waters of 
the ocean swell with the increase of the moon. The waters, although really 
neither more nor less, dilate or contract as the moon increases or wanes in the 
light and dark fortnights. The rise and fall of the waters of the different seas is 
five hundred and ten inches. 

Beyond the sea of fresh water is a region of twice its extent, where the land is of 
gold, and where no living beings reside. Thence extends the Lokaloka mountain, 
which is ten thousand Yojanas in breadth, and as many in height; and beyond it 
perpetual darkness invests the mountain all around; which darkness is again 
encompassed by the shell of the egg. 



Such, Maitreya, is the earth, which with its continents, mountains, oceans, and 
exterior shell, is fifty crores (five hundred millions) of Yojanas in extent. It is the 
mother and nurse of all creatures, the foundation of all worlds, and the chief of 
the elements. 




Footnotes 

01. So the commentator explains the terms Avasarpirii and Utsarpirii; but 
these words most commonly designate divisions of time peculiar to the 
Jainas; during the former of which men are supposed to decline from 
extreme felicity to extreme distress; and in the latter, to ascend from 
misery to happiness. The author of the text had possibly the Jaina use of 
these terms in view; and if so, wrote after their system was promulgated. 

02. The Kurma is the only Purana in which the white island, Sweta-dwipa, 
the abode of Vishnu, is included in the geography of the world: an 
incidental description of it is quoted by Col. Wilford from the Uttara 
Kharida of the Padma Purana (As. Res. XI. 99); and it is in this and in the 
Brahma Vaivartta that allusions to it are most frequent and copious. 

03. A slight alteration has been here made in the order of the description. 

04. The description of the Dwipas in the Agni, Brahma, Kurma, and Vayu 
Puranas agrees with that of our text. The Markarideya, Linga, and Matsya 
contain no details. The Bhagavata and Padma follow the same order as 
the Vishnu, &c. but alter all the names, and, many of the measurements. 
The account of the Mahabharata is very irregular and confused. The 
variations throw no additional light upon the geographical system of the 
Puranas. Some traces of this appear discoverable in the west; and the 
seven Dwipas, with their surrounding seas, may have some connexion 
with the notion of the seven climates, as Col. Wilford has supposed. That 
learned, but fanciful writer bestowed great pains upon the verification of 
these fictions, and imagined the different Dwipas to represent actual 
divisions of the globe: Jambu being India; Kusa, the Kush of Scripture, 
or the countries between Mesopotamia and India: Plaksha being Asia 
Minor; Salmali, eastern Europe; Krauncha, Germany; Saka, the British 
isles; and Pushkara, Iceland. The white or silver island, or island of the 


moon, was also, according to him, the island of Great Britain. Whatever 
may be thought of his conclusions, his essays on these subjects, 
particularly in the eighth, tenth, and eleventh volumes of the Asiatic 
Researches, contain much curious and interesting matter. 

05. Although the Hindus seem to have had a notion of the cause of the tides, 
they were not very accurate observers of the effect. The extreme rise of 
the tide in the Hugli river has never exceeded twenty feet, and its average 
is about fifteen. (As. Res. vol. XVIII. Kyd on the Tides of the Hugli.) 

06. The Anda kataha. The Kataha is properly a shallow hemispherical vessel, 
a saucer; but compounded in this form, implies the shell of the mundane 
egg. The Bhagavata thus describes these portions of the world: "Beyond 
the sea of fresh water is the mountain belt, called Lokaloka, the circular 
boundary between the world and void space. The interval between Meru 
and Manasottara is the land of living beings. Beyond the fresh water sea 
is the region of gold, which shines like the bright surface of a mirror, but 
from which no sensible object presented to it is ever reflected, and 
consequently it is avoided by living creatures. The mountain range by 
which it is encircled is termed Lokaloka, because the world is separated 
by it from that which is not world; for which purpose it was placed by 
Iswara on the limit of the three worlds; and its height and breadth are 
such that the rays of the heavenly luminaries, from the sun to the polar- 
star, which spread over the regions within the mountain, cannot penetrate 
beyond it." According to Col. Wilford, however, there is a chasm in the 
belt, and a sea beyond it, where Vishnu abides; but he has not given his 
authorities for this. (As. Res. XI. 54.) The Mohammedan legends of Koh 
Kaf, 'the stony girdle that surrounds the world,' are evidently connected 
with the Lokaloka of the Hindus. According to the Siva Tantra, the El 
Dorado, at the foot of the Lokaloka mountains, is the play-ground of the 
gods. 

07. This comprises the planetary spheres; for the diameter of the seven zones 
and oceans—each ocean being of the same diameter as the continent it 
encloses, and each successive continent being twice the diameter of that 
which precedes it—amounts to but two crones and fifty-four lacs. The 
golden land is twice the diameter of Pushkara, or two crones and fifty-six 
lacs; and the Lokaloka is but ten thousand Yojanas. So that the whole is 
five crores ten lacs and ten thousand (5.10.10.000). According to the Siva 
Tantra, the golden land is ten crores of Yojanas, making, with the seven 


continents, one fourth of the whole measurement. Other calculations 
occur, the incompatibility of which is said by the commentators on our 
text, and on that of the Bhagavata, to arise from reference being made to 
different Kalpas, and they quote the same stanza to this effect: 'Whenever 
any contradictions in different Puranas are observed, they are ascribed by 
the pious to differences of Kalpas and the like.' 




05. Chapter 


Of the seven regions of Patala, below the earth. Narada's praises of Patala. 
Account of the serpent Sesha. First teacher of astronomy and astrology. 

PARASARA.—The extent of the surface of the earth has been thus described to 
you, Maitreya. Its depth below the surface is said to be seventy thousand 
Yojanas, each of the seven regions of Patala extending downwards ten thousand. 
These seven, worthy Muni, are called Atala, Vitala, Nitala, Gabhastimat, 
Mahatala, Sutala, and Patala. Their soil is severally white, black, purple, yellow, 
sandy, stony, and of gold. They are embellished with magnificent palaces, in 
which dwell numerous Danavas, Daityas, Yakshas, and great snake-gods. The 
Muni Narada, after his return from those regions to the skies, declared amongst 
the celestials that Patala was much more delightful than Indra's heaven. "What," 
exclaimed the sage, "can be compared to Patala, where the Nagas are decorated 
with brilliant and beautiful and pleasure-shedding jewels? who will not delight 
in Patala, where the lovely daughters of the Daityas and Danavas wander about, 
fascinating even the most austere; where the rays of the sun diffuse light, and not 
heat, by day; and where the moon shines by night for illumination, not for cold; 
where the sons of Danu, happy in the enjoyment of delicious viands and strong 
wines, know not how time passes? There are beautiful groves and streams and 
lakes where the lotus blows; and the skies are resonant with the Koil's song. 
Splendid ornaments, fragrant perfumes, rich unguents, the blended music of the 
lute and pipe and tabor; these and many other enjoyments are the common 
portion of the Danavas, Daityas, and snake-gods, who inhabit the regions of 
Patala." 

Below the seven Patalas is the form of Vishnu, proceeding from the quality of 
darkness, which is called Sesha, the excellencies of which neither Daityas nor 
Danavas can fully enumerate. This being is called Ananta by the spirits of 
heaven, and is worshipped by sages and by gods. He has a thousand heads, 
which are embellished with the pure and visible mystic sign and the thousand 
jewels in his crests give light to all the regions. For the benefit of the world he: 
deprives the Asuras of their strength. He rolls his eyes fiercely, as if intoxicated. 
He wears a single ear-ring, a diadem, and wreath upon each brow; and shines 


like the white mountains topped with flame. He is clothed in purple raiment, and 
ornamented with a white necklace, and looks like another Kailasa, with the 
heavenly Ganga flowing down its precipices. In one hand he holds a plough, and 
in the other a pestle; and he is attended by Varum (the goddess of wine), who is 
his own embodied radiance. From his mouths, at the end of the Kalpa, proceeds 
the venomed fire that, impersonated as Rudra, who is one with Balarama, 
devours the three worlds. 

Sesha bears the entire world, like a diadem, upon his head, and he is the 
foundation on which the seven Patalas rest. His power, his glory, his form, his 
nature, cannot be described, cannot he comprehended by the gods themselves. 
Who shall recount his might, who wears this whole earth, like a garland of 
flowers, tinged of a purple dye by the radiance of the jewels of his crests. When 
Ananta, his eyes rolling with intoxication, yawns, then earth, with all her woods, 
and mountains, and seas, and rivers, trembles. Gandharbas, Apsarasas, Siddhas, 
Kinnaras, Uragas, and Charanas are unequal to hymn his praises, and therefore 
he is called the infinite (Ananta), the imperishable. The sandal paste, that is 
ground by the wives of the snake-gods, is scattered abroad by his breath, and 
sheds perfume around the skies. 

The ancient sage Garga, having propitiated Sesha, acquired from him a 
knowledge of the principles of astronomical science, of the planets, and of the 
good and evil denoted by the aspects of the heavens. 

The earth, sustained upon the head of this sovereign serpent, supports in its turn 
the garland of the spheres, along with their inhabitants, men, demons, and gods. 


Footnotes 

01. In the Bhagavata and Padma P. they are named Atala, Vitala, Sutala, 
Talatala, Mahatala, Rasatala, and Patala. The Vayu has Rasatala, Sutala, 
Vitala, Gabhastala, Mahatala, Sritala, and Patala. There are other 
varieties. 

02. Allusion is here made, perhaps, to the description given in the 


Mahabharata, Udyoga Parva of Narada's and Matali's visit to Patala. 
Several of the particulars there given are not noticed in the Puranas. 

03. There is no very copious description of Patala in any of the Puranas. The 
most circumstantial are those of the Vayu and Bhagavata: the latter has 
been repeated, with some additions, in the first chapters of the Patala 
Kharida of the Padma Puraria. The Mahabharata and these two Puranas 
assign different divisions to the Danavas, Daityas, and Nagas; placing 
Vasuki and the other Naga chiefs in the lowest: but the Vayu has the 
cities of the principal Daityas and Nagas in each; as in the first, those of 
the Daitya Namuchi, and serpent Kaliya; in the second, of Hayagriva and 
Takshaka; in the third, of Prahlada and Hemaka; in the fourth, of 
Kalanemi and Vainateya; in the fifth, of Hirariyaksha and Kirmira; and in 
the sixth, of Puloman and Vasuki: besides others. Bali the Daitya is the 
sovereign of Patala, according to this authority. The Mahabharata places 
Vasuki in Rasatala, and calls his capital Bhogavati. The regions of Patala, 
and their inhabitants, are oftener the subjects of profane, than of sacred 
fiction, in consequence of the frequent intercourse between mortal heroes 
and the Naga-kanyas, or serpent-nymphs. A considerable section of the 
Vrihat Katha, the Suryaprabha lambaka, consists of adventures and 
events in this subterraneous world. 

04. Sesha is commonly described as being in this situation: he is the great 
serpent on which Vishnu sleeps during the intervals of creation, and upon 
whose numerous heads the world is supported. The Puranas, making him 
one with Balarama or Sankarshana, who is an impersonation or 
incarnation of Sesha, blend the attributes of the serpent and the demigod 
in their description. 

05. With the Swastika, a particular diagram used in mystical ceremonies. 

06. One of the oldest writers on astronomy amongst the Hindus. According 
to Mr. Bentley, his Sanhita dates 548 B. C. (Ancient Astron. of the 
Hindus.) 




06. Chapter 


Of the different hells or divisions of Naraka, below Patala: the crimes punished 
in them respectively: efficacy of expiation: meditation on Vishnu the most 
effective expiation. 

PARASARA.—I will now, great Muni, give you an account of the hells which are 
situated beneath the earth and beneath the waters, and into which sinners are 
finally sent. 

The names of the different Narakas are as follows: Raurava, Sukara, Rodha, 
Tala, Visasana, Mahajwala, Taptakumbha, Lavana, Vimohana, Rudhirandha, 
Vaitarani, Krimisa, Krimibhojana, Asipatravana, Krishna, Lalabhaksha, Daruna, 
Puyavaha, Papa, Vahnijwala, Adhosiras, Sandansa, Kalasutra, Tamas, Avichi, 
Swabhojana, Apratishtha, and another Avichi. These and many other fearful hells 
are the awful provinces of the kingdom of Yama, terrible with instruments of 
torture and with fire; into which are hurled all those who are addicted when alive 
to sinful practices. 

The man who bears false witness through partiality, or who utters any falsehood, 
is condemned to the Raurava (dreadful) hell. He who causes abortion, plunders a 
town, kills a cow, or strangles a man, goes to the Rodha hell (or that of 
obstruction). The murderer of a Brahman, stealer of gold, or drinker of wine, 
goes to the Sukara (swine) hell; as does any one who associates with them. The 
murderer of a man of the second or third castes, and one who is guilty of 
adultery with the wife of his spiritual teacher, is sentenced to the Tala (padlock) 
hell: and one who holds incestuous intercourse with a sister, or murders an 
ambassador, to Taptakumbha (or the hell of heated caldrons). The seller of his 
wife, a gaoler, a horsedealer, and one who deserts his adherents, falls into the 
Taptaloha (red-hot iron) hell. He who commits incest with a daughter-in-law or a 
daughter is cast into the Mahajwala hell (or that of great flame): and he who is 
disrespectful to his spiritual guide, who is abusive to his betters, who reviles the 
Vedas, or who sells them, who associates with women in a prohibited degree, 
into the Lavana (salt) hell. A thief and a contemner of prescribed observances 
falls into Vimohana (the place of bewildering). He who hates his father, the 


Brahmans, and the gods, or who spoils precious gems, is punished in the 
Krimibhaksha hell (where worms are his food): and he who practises magic rites 
for the harm of others, in the hell called Krimisa (that of insects). The vile 
wretch who eats his meal before offering food to the gods, to the manes, or to 
guests, falls into the hell called Lalabhaksha (where saliva is given for food). 
The maker of arrows is sentenced to the Vedhaka (piercing) hell: and the maker 
of lances, swords, and other weapons, to the dreadful hell called Visasana 
(murderous). He who takes unlawful gifts goes to the Adhomukha (or head- 
inverted) hell; as does one who offers sacrifices to improper objects, and an 
observer of the stars (for the prediction of events). He who eats by himself 
sweetmeats mixed with his rice, and a Brahman who vends Lac, flesh, liquors, 
sesamum, or salt, or one who commits violence, fall into the hell (where matter 
flows, or) Puyavaha; as do they who rear cats, cocks, goats, dogs, hogs, or birds. 
Public performers, fishermen, the follower of one born in adultery, a poisoner, an 
informer, one who lives by his wife's prostitution, one who attends to secular 
affairs on the days of the Parvas (or full and new moon, &c.), an incendiary, a 
treacherous friend, a soothsayer, one who performs religious ceremonies for 
rustics, and those who sell the acid Asclepias, used in sacrifices, go to the 
Rudhirandha hell (whose wells are of blood). He who destroys a bee-hive, or 
pillages a hamlet, is condemned to the Vaitarani hell. He who causes impotence, 
trespasses on others' lands, is impure, or who lives by fraud, is punished in the 
hell called (black, or) Krishna. He who wantonly cuts down trees goes to the 
Asipatravana hell (the leaves of whose trees are swords): and a tender on sheep, 
and hunter of deer, to the hell termed Vahnijwala (or fiery flame); as do those 
who apply fire to unbaked vessels (potters). The violator of a vow, and one who 
breaks the rules of his order, falls into the Sandansa (or hell of pincers): and the 
religious student who sleeps in the day, and is, though unconsciously, defiled; 
and they who, though mature, are instructed in sacred literature by their children, 
receive punishment in the hell called Swabhojana (where they feed upon dogs). 
These hells, and hundreds and thousands of others, are the places in which 
sinners pay the penalty of their crimes. As numerous as are the offences that men 
commit, so many are the hells in which they are punished: and all who deviate 
from the duties imposed upon them by their caste and condition, whether in 
thought, word, or deed, are sentenced to punishment in the regions of the 
damned. 


The gods in heaven are beheld by the inhabitants of hell, as they move with their 



heads inverted; whilst the god, as they cast their eyes downwards, behold the 
sufferings of those in hell. The various stages of existence, Maitreya, are 
inanimate things, fish, birds, animals, men, holy men, gods, and liberated spirits; 
each in succession a thousand degrees superior to that which precedes it: and 
through these stages the beings that are either in heaven or in hell are destined to 
proceed, until final emancipation be obtained. That sinner goes to Naraka who 
neglects the due expiation of his guilt. 

For, Maitreya, suitable acts of expiation have been enjoined by the great sages 
for every kind of crime. Arduous penances for great sins, trifling ones for minor 
offences, have been propounded by Swayambhuva and others: but reliance upon 
Krishna is far better than any such expiatory acts, as religious austerity, or the 
like. Let any one who repents of the sin of which he may have been culpable 
have recourse to this best of all expiations, remembrance of Hari by addressing 
his thoughts to Narayaria at dawn, at night, at sunset, and midday, a man shall be 
quickly cleansed from all guilt: the whole heap of worldly sorrows is dispersed 
by meditating on Hari; and his worshipper, looking upon heavenly fruition as an 
impediment to felicity, obtains final emancipation. He whose mind is devoted to 
Hari in silent prayer, burnt-offering, or adoration, is impatient even of the glory 
of the king of the gods. Of what avail is ascent to the summit of heaven, if it is 
necessary to return from thence to earth. How different is the meditation on 
Vasudeva, which is the seed of eternal freedom. Hence, Muni, the man who 
thinks of Vishnu, day and night, goes not to Naraka after death, for all his sins 
are atoned for. 

Heaven (or Swarga) is that which delights the mind; hell (or Naraka) is that 
which gives it pain: hence vice is called hell; virtue is called heaven. The 
selfsame thing is applicable to the production of pleasure or pain, of malice or of 
anger. Whence then can it be considered as essentially the same with either? 
That which at one time is a source of enjoyment, becomes at another the cause of 
suffering; and the same thing may at different seasons excite wrath, or conciliate 
favour. It follows, then, that nothing is in itself either pleasurable or painful; and 
pleasure and pain, and the like, are merely definitions of various states of mind. 
That which alone is truth is wisdom; but wisdom may be the cause of 
confinement to existence; for all this universe is wisdom, there is nothing 
different from it; and consequently, Maitreya, you are to conclude that both 
knowledge and ignorance are comprised in wisdom. 



I have thus described to you the orb of the earth; the regions below its surface, or 
Patalas; and the Narakas, or hells; and have briefly enumerated its oceans, 
mountains, continents, regions, and rivers: what else do you wish to hear? 


Footnotes 

01. The Bhagavata places the Narakas above the waters. The commentator 
on our text endeavours to reconcile the difference, by explaining the text 
to imply a dark cavity in which the waters are received, not the original 
abysses where they were collected at first, and above which Tartarus lies. 

02. Some of these names are the same that are given by Manu, b. IV. v. 88- 

r r r 

90. Kulluka Bhatta refers to the Markarideya P. for a description of the 
twenty-one divisions of hell; but the account there given is not more 
ample than that of our text. The Bhagavata enumerates twenty-eight, but 
many of the names differ from the above. In the last instance the term 
Avichi is either inaccurately repeated, or the adjective Apara is intended 
to distinguish it from the previous Avichi. In Manu, Mahavichi occurs. 

03. The Padma P. (Kriya Yoga Sara) and the Siva Dharma, which appears to 
be a section of the Skanda P., contain a number of interesting 
circumstances previous to the infliction of punishment. It appears also 
from them that Yama fulfils the office of judge of the dead, as well as 
sovereign of the damned; all that die appearing before him, and being 
confronted with Chitragupta, the recorder, by whom their actions have 
been registered. The virtuous are thence conveyed to Swarga, or Elysium, 
whilst the wicked are driven to the different regions of Naraka, or 
Tartarus. 

04. 'Who teaches the Vedas for hire.' This notion still prevails, and renders 
the few Pandits who are acquainted with the Vedas very unwilling to 
teach them for a gratuity. 

05. 'Thereby,' observes the commentator, 'defrauding or disappointing 
children.' 

06. Rangopajivina: the commentator explains it wrestlers and boxers, but 
Ranga applies to any stage or arena. 


07. The term in the text is Mahishika, which might mean a feeder of 
buffaloes; but the commentator quotes a text from the Smriti, authorizing 
the sense above followed. 

08. This is the interpretation of Parvakari; it is also read Parvagami, he who 
cohabits with his wife on prohibited days.' 

09. An account of Naraka is found in only a few of the Purarias, and in less 
detail than in the text. The Bhagavata and Vayu have similar descriptions 
of them. The Markarideya enters into detail in some of the instances only. 
A short account is found in the Siva, Garura, and Brahma Vaivartta P. and 
in the Kasr Kharida of the Skanda P. The fullest descriptions, however, 
are those mentioned in a previous note as being in the Siva Dharma of 
the Skanda, and Kriya Yoga Sara of the Padma; works of a somewhat 
equivocal character, and belonging rather to Tantra than Paurariik 
literature. 

10. The commentator observes that the sight of heavenly bliss is given to the 
damned in order to exacerbate their torments; whilst the inflictions of 
hell are exhibited to the gods to teach them disregard of even heavenly 
enjoyments, as they are but of temporary duration. 

11. That is, when punishment or reward in hell or heaven, proportioned to 
the sin or virtue of the individual, has been received, he must be born 
again as a stone or plant, and gradually migrate through the several 
inferior conditions, until he is once more born a man; his future state is 
then in his own power. 

12. Manu is here especially intended, as the commentator observes. 

13. This remembrance of Vishnu is the frequent reiteration of any or all of 
his names: hence the lower orders of Hindus procure a starling or parrot, 
that, in the act of teaching it to cry Rama or Krishna or Radha, they may 
themselves repeat these appellations; the simple recitation of which, even 
if accidentally, irreverently, or reluctantly performed, is meritorious. Thus 
according to the Vishnu Disarms Tantra: 'Let a man ever and every where 
repeat the names of the discus-armed (Vishnu); for its repetition, even by 
one who is impure, is a means of purification. Hari removes all sins, even 
when invoked by evil-minded persons, as fire burns one by whom it is 
unwillingly approached.' 

14. The object of the text, according to the commentator, is to shew that the 
common notions of heaven and hell are erroneous; that they are only 
temporal pleasure and temporal pain; and virtue and vice, being the 


origin of transient, and therefore unreal effects, are themselves 
unrealities: there is nothing real but faith in Vishnu. 

15. Text and comment are here somewhat obscure; but the purport of the 
former seems to be the explanation of the existence of Jnyan wisdom, 
both as a genus and a species: in the former case it is all that is; and in the 
latter, it may be either true or false wisdom: the latter being influenced by 
notions of self or individuality, and therefore the cause of confinement to 
existence; the former dissipating the belief of self, and being therefore 
the cause of liberation from bodily being. 




07. Chapter 


Extent and situation of the seven spheres, viz. earth, sky, planets, Mahar-loka, 
Janaloka, Tapo-loka, and Satya-loka. Of the egg of Brahma, and its elementary 
envelopes. Of the influence of the energy of Vishnu. 

MAITREYA.—The sphere of the whole earth has been described to me by you, 
excellent Brahman, and I am now desirous to hear an account of the other 
spheres above the world, the Bhuvar-loka and the rest, and the situation and the 
dimensions of the celestial luminaries. 

PARASARA. The sphere of the earth (or Bhur-loka), comprehending its oceans, 
mountains, and rivers, extends as far as it is illuminated by the rays of the sun 
and moon; and to the same extent, both in diameter and circumference, the 
sphere of the sky (Bhuvar-loka) spreads above it (as far upwards as to the 
planetary sphere, or Swar-loka). The solar orb is situated a hundred thousand 
leagues from the earth; and that of the moon an equal distance from the sun. At 
the same interval above the moon occurs the orbit of all the lunar constellations. 
The planet Budha (Mercury) is two hundred thousand leagues above the lunar 
mansions. Sukra (Venus) is at the same distance from Mercury. Angaraka (Mars) 
is as far above Venus; and the priest of the gods (Vrihaspati, or Jupiter) as far 
from Mars: whilst Saturn (Sani) is two hundred and fifty thousand leagues 
beyond Jupiter. The sphere of the seven Rishis (Ursa Major) is a hundred 
thousand leagues above Saturn; and at a similar height above the seven Rishis is 
Dhruva (the pole-star), the pivot or axis of the whole planetary circle. Such, 
Maitreya, is the elevation of the three spheres (Bhiir, Bhuvar, Swar) which form 
the region of the consequences of works. The region of works is here (or in the 
land of Bharata). 

Above Dhruva, at the distance of ton million leagues, lies the sphere of saints, or 
Mahar-loka, the inhabitants of which dwell in it throughout a Kalpa, or day of 
Brahma. At twice that distance is situated Janaloka, where Sanandana and other 
pure-minded sons of Brahma, reside. At four times the distance, between the two 
last, lies the Tapo-loka (the sphere of penance), inhabited by the deities called 
Vaibhrajas, who are unconsumable by fire. At six times the distance (or twelve 


Crores, a hundred and twenty millions of leagues) is situated Satya-loka, the 
sphere of truth, the inhabitants of which never again know death. 

Wherever earthy substance exists, which may be traversed by the feet, that 
constitutes the sphere of the earth, the dimensions of which I have already 
recounted to you. The region that extends from the earth to the sun, in which the 
Siddhas and other celestial beings move, is the atmospheric sphere, which also I 
have described. The interval between the sun and Dhruva, extending fourteen 
hundred thousand leagues, is called by those who are acquainted with the system 
of the universe the heavenly sphere. These three spheres are termed transitory: 
the three highest, Jana, Tapa, and Satya, are styled durable Maharloka, as 
situated between the two, has also a mixed character; for although it is deserted 
at the end of the Kalpa, it is not destroyed. These seven spheres, together with 
the Patalas, forming the extent of the whole world, I have thus, Maitreya, 
explained to you. 

The world is encompassed on every side and above and below by the shell of the 
egg of Brahma, in the same manner as the seed of the wood-apple is invested by 
its rind. Around the outer surface of the shell flows water, for a space equal to 
ten times the diameter of the world. The waters, again, are encompassed 
exteriorly by fire; fire by air; and air by Mind; Mind by the origin of the 
elements (Ahankara); and that by Intellect: each of these extends ten times the 
breadth of that which it encloses; and the last is encircled by the chief Principle, 
Pradhana, which is infinite, and its extent cannot be enumerated: it is therefore 
called the boundless and illimitable cause of all existing things, supreme nature, 
or Prakriti; the cause of all mundane eggs, of which there are thousands and tens 
of thousands, and millions and thousands of millions, such as has been 
described. Within Pradhana resides Soul, diffusive, conscious, and self- 
irradiating, as fire is inherent in flint, or sesamum oil in its seed. Nature 
(Pradhana) and soul (Puman) are both of the character of dependants, and are 
encompassed by the energy of Vishnu, which is one with the soul of the world, 
and which is the cause of the separation of those two (soul and nature) at the 
period of dissolution; of their aggregation in the continuance of things; and of 
their combination at the season of creation. In the same manner as the wind 
mffles the surface of the water in a hundred bubbles, which of themselves are 
inert, so the energy of Vishnu influences the world, consisting of inert nature and 
soul. Again, as a tree, consisting of root, stem, and branches, springs from a 



primitive seed, and produces other seeds, whence grow other trees analogous to 
the first in species, product, and origin, so from the first unexpanded germ (of 
nature, or Pradhana) spring Mahat (Intellect) and the other rudiments of things; 
from them proceed the grosser elements; and from them men and gods, who are 
succeeded by sons and the sons of sons. In the growth of a tree from the seed, no 
detriment occurs to the parent plant, neither is there any waste of beings by the 
generation of others. In like manner as space and time and the rest are the cause 
of the tree (through the materiality of the seed), so the divine Hari is the cause of 
all things by successive developements (through the materiality of nature). As all 
the parts of the future plant, existing in the seed of rice, or the root, the culm, the 
leaf, the shoot, the stem, the bud, the fruit, the milk, the grain, the chaff, the ear, 
spontaneously evolve when they are in approximation with the subsidiary means 
of growth (or earth and water), so gods, men, and other beings, involved in many 
actions (or necessarily existing in those states which are the consequences of 
good or evil acts), become manifested only in their full growth, through the 
influence of the energy of Vishnu. 

This Vishnu is the supreme spirit (Brahma), from whence all this world 
proceeds, who is the world, by whom the world subsists, and in whom it will be 
resolved. That spirit (or Brahma) is the supreme state of Vishnu, which is the 
essence of all that is visible or invisible; with which all that is, is identical; and 
whence all animate and inanimate existence is derived. He is primary nature: he, 
in a perceptible form, is the world: and in him all finally melts; through him all 
things endure. He is the performer of the rites of devotion: he is the rite: he is the 
fruit which it bestows: he is the implements by which it is performed. There is 
nothing besides the illimitable Hari. 


Footnotes 

01. Bhur-loka, the terrestrial sphere, is earth and the lower regions; from 
thence to the sun is the Bhuvar-loka, or atmospheric sphere; and from the 
sun to Dhruva is the Swar-loka, or heaven; as subsequently explained in 
the text, and in other Puranas. 

02. A similar account of the situations and distances of the planets occurs in 


the Padma, Kurma, and Vayu Puranas. The Bhagavata has one or two 
varieties, but they are of no great importance. 

03. An account of these Lokas is met with only in a few of the Puranas, and 
is not much more detailed in them than in our text. The Vayu is most 
circumstantial. According to that authority, Mahar, which is so called 
from a mystical term Maha, is the abode of the Ganadevas, the Yamas 
and others, who are the regents or rulers of the Kalpa, the Kalpadhikaris 
they are so designated also in the Kurma. The Kasi Khanda refers the 
name to Mahas, 'light,' the sphere being invested with radiance. Its 
inhabitants are also called lords of the Kalpa: but the commentator 
explains this to denote Bhrigu and the other patriarchs, whose lives 
endure for a day of Brahma. The different accounts agree in stating, that 
when the three lower spheres are consumed by fire, Mahar-loka is 
deserted by its tenants, who repair to the next sphere, or Jana-loka. Jana- 
loka, according to the Vayu, is the residence of the Rishis and demigods 
during the night of Brahma, and is termed Jana because the patriarchs are 
the progenitors of mankind. The Kasi Khanda agrees with the Vishnu in 
peopling it with Sanandana and the other ascetic sons of Brahma, and 
with Yogis like themselves. These are placed by the Vayu in the Tapo- 
loka, and they and the other sages, and the demigods, after repeated 
appearances in the world, become at last Vairajas in the Brahma or Satya 
loka. After many divine ages of residence there with Brahma, they are, 
along with him, absorbed, at the end of his existence into the indiscrete. 
The commentator on the Kasi Khanda explains Vairaja to mean 'relating 
to, or derived from, Brahma or Viraj.' The Vairajas are there, as in the 
Vishnu Purana, placed in the Tapo-loka, and are explained to be ascetics, 
mendicants, anchorets, and penitents, who have completed a course of 
rigorous austerities. It maybe doubted, however, if the Pauraniks have 
very precise notions regarding these spheres and their inhabitants, The 
Puranas of a decidedly sectarial character add other and higher worlds to 
the series. Thus the Kurma identifies Brahma-loka with Vishnu-loka, and 
has a Rudra-loka above it. The Siva places Vishnu-loka above Brahma- 
loka, and Rudra-loka above that. In the Kasi Khanda as we have, instead 
of those two, Vaikuntha and Kailasa, as the lofty worlds of Vishnu and 
Siva; whilst the Brahma Vaivartta has above all a Go-loka, a world or 
heaven of cows and Krishna. These are all evidently additions to the 
original system of seven worlds, in which we have probably some 


relation to the seven climates of the ancients, the seven stages or degrees 
of the earth of the Arabs, and the seven heavens of the Mohammedans, if 
not to the seven Amshaspends of the Parsis. Seven, suggested originally 
perhaps by the seven planets, seems to have been a favourite number 
with various nations of antiquity. Amongst the Hindus it was applied to a 
variety of sacred or mythological objects, which are enumerated in a 
verse in the Hanuman Nataka. Rama is described there as piercing seven 
palm-trees with an arrow, on which other groups of seven take fright, as 
the seven steeds of the sun, the seven spheres, Munis, seas, continents, 
and mothers of the gods. 

04. Kritika and Akritika; literally 'made and unmade:' the former being 
renewed every Kalpa, the latter perishing only at the end of Brahma's 
life. 

05. Of the Kapittha (Feronia Elephantum). 

06. See before the order in which the elements are evolved. 

07. The followers of Anaximander and Democritus taught "an aneipia 
Kocrpcov 'an infinity of worlds;' and that not only successive in that space 
which this world of ours is conceived now to occupy, in respect of the 
infinity of past and future time, but also a contemporary infinity of 
coexistent worlds, at all times, throughout endless and unbounded 
space." Intellect. System, I. 303. 

08. Literally 'in wood,' the attrition of two pieces of which does not create, 
but developes, their latent heat and flame. 

09. Thus in Scipio's dream the divinity is made the external limit of the 
universe: "Novem tibi orbibus vel potius globis connexa sunt omnia, 
quomm unus est caelestis externus qui reliquos omnes complectitur, 
summus ipse deus arcens et continens ceteros:" which Macrobius 
explains as to be understood of the Supreme First Cause of all things, 
only in respect of his supremacy over all, and from his comprehending as 
well as creating all things, and being regarded as the soul of the world: 
"Quod et virtutes omnes, quae illam primae omnipotentiam summitates 
sequuntur, aut ipse faciat aut ipse contineat: ipsam denique Jovem veteres 
vocaverunt, et apud theologos Jupiter est mundi anima." In Somn. Scip. 
c. XVII. 

10. The two passages in parentheses are the additions of the commentator, 
intended to explain how the deity is the material cause of the world. He is 
not so of his own essence, not so immediately, but through the 


interposition of Pradhana: 'As however he is the source of Prakriti, he 
must be considered the material as well as immaterial cause of being.' 




08. Chapter 


Description of the sun: his chariot; its two axles: his horses. The cities of the 
regents of the cardinal points. The sun's course: nature of his rays: his path along 
the ecliptic. Length of day and night. Divisions of time: equinoxes and solstices, 
months, years, the cyclical Yuga, or age of five years. Northern and southern 
declinations. Saints on the Lokaloka mountain. Celestial paths of the Pitris, gods, 
Vishnu. Origin of Ganga, and separation, on the top of Meru, into four great 
rivers. 

PARASARA.—Having thus described to you the system of the world in general, 
I will now explain to you the dimensions and situations of the sun and other 
luminaries. 

The chariot of the sun is nine thousand leagues in length, and the pole is of twice 
that longitude the axle is fifteen millions and seven hundred thousand leagues 
long on which is fixed a wheel with three naves, five spokes, and six peripheries, 
consisting of the ever-during year; the whole constituting the circle or wheel of 
time. The chariot has another axle, which is forty-five thousand five hundred 
leagues long. The two halves of the yoke are of the same length respectively as 
the two axles (the longer and the shorter). The short axle, with the short yoke, 
are supported by the pole-star: the end of the longer axle, to which the wheel of 
the car is attached, moves on the Manasa mountain. The seven horses of the 
sun's car are the metres of the Vedas, Gayatri, Vrihati, Ushriih, Jayati, Trishtubh, 
Anushtubh, and Pankti. 

The city of Indra is situated on the eastern side of the Manasottara mountain; that 
of Yama on the southern face; that of Varuna on the west; and that of Soma on 
the north: named severally Vaswokasara, Samyamani, Mukhya, and Vibhavari. 

The glorious sun, Maitreya, darts like an arrow on his southern course, attended 
by the constellations of the Zodiac. He causes the difference between day and 
night, and is the divine vehicle and path of the sages who have overcome the 
inflictions of the world. Whilst the sun, who is the discriminator of all hours, 
shines in one continent in midday, in the opposite Dwipas, Maitreya, it will be 


midnight: rising and setting are at all seasons, and are always (relatively) 
opposed in the different cardinal and intermediate points of the horizon. When 
the sun becomes visible to any people, to them he is said to rise; when he 
disappears from their view, that is called his setting. There is in truth neither 
rising nor setting of the sun, for he is always; and these terms merely imply his 
presence and his disappearance. 

When the sun (at midday) passes over either of the cities of the gods, on the 
Manasottara mountain (at the cardinal points), his light extends to three cities 
and two intermediate points: when situated in an intermediate point, he 
illuminates two of the cities and three intermediate, points (in either case one 
hemisphere). From the period of his rise the sun moves with increasing rays until 
noon, when he proceeds towards his setting with rays diminishing (that is, his 
heat increases or diminishes in proportion as he advances to, or recedes from, the 
meridian of any place). The east and west quarters are so called from the sun's 
rising and setting there. As far as the sun shines in front, so far he shines behind 
and on either hand, illuminating all places except the summit of Meru, the 
mountain of the immortals; for when his rays reach the court of Brahma, which 
is there situated, they are repelled and driven back by the overpowering radiance 
which there prevails: consequently there is always the alternation of day and 
night, according as the divisions of the continent lie in the northern (or southern) 
quarter, or inasmuch as they are situated north (or south) of Meru. 

The radiance of the solar orb, when the sun has set, is accumulated in fire, and 
hence fire is visible at a greater distance by night than by day: during the latter a 
fourth of the rays of fire blend with those of the sun, and from their union the 
sun shines with greater intensity by day. Elemental light, and heat derived from 
the sun or from fire, blending with each other, mutually prevail in various 
proportions, both by day and night. When the sun is present either in the 
southern or the northern hemisphere, day or night retires into the waters, 
according as they are invaded by darkness or light: it is from this cause that the 
waters look dark by day, because night is within them; and they look white by 
night, because at the setting of the sun the light of day takes refuge in their 
bosom. 

When the sun has travelled in the centre of Pushkara a thirtieth part of the 
circumference of the globe, his course is equal in time to one Muhurtta and 



whirling round like the circumference of the wheel of a potter, he distributes day 
and night upon the earth. In the commencement of his northern course, the sun 
passes to Capricornus, thence to Aquarius, thence to Pisces, going successively 
from one sign of the Zodiac to another. After he has passed through these, the 
sun attains his equinoctial movement (the vernal equinox), when he makes the 
day and night of equal duration. Thenceforward the length of the night 
decreases, and the day becomes longer, until the sun reaches the end of Gemini, 
when he pursues a different direction, and, entering Cancer, begins his 
declension to the south. As the circumference of a potter's wheel revolves most 
rapidly, so the sun travels rapidly on his southern journey: he flies along his path 
with the velocity of wind, and traverses a great distance in a short time. In 
twelve Muhurttas he passes through thirteen lunar asterisms and a half during the 
day; and during the night he passes through the same distance, only in eighteen 
Muhurttas. As the centre of the potter's wheel revolves more slowly than the 
circumference, so the sun in his northern path again revolves with less rapidity, 
and moves over a less space of the earth in a longer time, until, at the end of his 
northern route, the day is again eighteen Muhurttas, and the night twelve; the sun 
passing through half the lunar mansions by day and by night in those periods 
respectively. As the lump of clay on the centre of the potter's wheel moves most 
slowly, so the polar-star, which is in the centre of the zodiacal wheel, revolves 
very tardily, and ever remains in the centre, as the clay continues in the centre of 
the wheel of the potter. 

The relative length of the day or night depends upon the greater or less velocity 
with which the sun revolves through the degrees between the two points of the 
horizon. In the solstitial period, in which his diurnal path is quickest, his 
nocturnal is slowest; and in that in which he moves quick by night, he travels 
slowly by day. The extent of his journey is in either case the same; for in the 
course of the day and night he passes through all the signs of the Zodiac, or six 
by night, and the same number by day: the length and shortness of the day are 
measured by the extent of the signs; and the duration of day and night by the 
period which the sun takes to pass through them. In his northern declination the 
sun moves quickest by night, and slowest by day; in his southern declination the 
reverse is the case. 

_ r 

The night is called Usha, and the day is denominated Vyushta, and the interval 
between them is called Sandhya. On the occurrence of the awful Sandhya, the 



terrific fiends termed Mandehas attempt to devour the sun; for Brahma 
denounced this curse upon them, that, without the power to perish, they should 
die every day (and revive by night), and therefore a fierce contest occurs daily 
between them and the sun. At this season pious Brahmans scatter water, purified 
by the mystical Omkara, and consecrated by the Gayatri and by this water, as by 
a thunderbolt, the foul fiends are consumed. When the first oblation is offered 
with solemn invocations in the morning rite, the thousand-rayed deity shines 
forth with unclouded splendour. Omkara is Vishnu the mighty, the substance of 
the three Vedas, the lord of speech; and by its enunciation those Rakshasas are 
destroyed. The sun is a principal part of Vishnu, and light is his immutable 
essence, the active manifestation of which is excited by the mystic syllable Om. 
Light effused by the utterance of Omkara becomes radiant, and burns up entirely 
the Rakshasas called Mandehas. The performance of the Sandhya (the morning) 
sacrifice must never therefore be delayed, for he who neglects it is guilty of the 
murder of the sun. Protected thus by the Brahmans and the pigmy sages called 
Balakhilyas, the sun goes on his course to give light to the world. 

r r 

Fifteen twinklings of the eye (Nimeshas) make a Kashtha; thirty Kashthas, a 
Kala; thirty Kalas, a Muhurtta (forty-eight minutes); and thirty Muhurttas, a day 
and night: the portions of the day are longer or shorter, as has been explained; 
but the Sandhya is always the same in increase or decrease, being only one 
Muhurtta. From the period that a line may be drawn across the sun (or that half 
his orb is visible) to the expiration of three Muhurttas (two hours and twenty- 
four minutes), that interval is called Pratar (morning), forming a fifth portion of 
the day. The next portion, or three Muhurttas from morning, is termed Sangava 
(forenoon): the three next Muhurttas constitute mid-day: the afternoon comprises 
the next three Muhurttas: the three Muhurttas following are considered as the 
evening: and the fifteen Muhurttas of the day are thus classed in five portions of 
three each. But the day consists of fifteen Muhurttas only at the equinoxes, 
increasing or diminishing in number in the northern and southern declinations of 
the sun, when the day encroaches on the night, or the night upon the day. The 
equinoxes occur in the seasons of spring and autumn, when the sun enters the 
signs of Aries and Libra. When the sun enters Capricorn (the winter solstice), his 
northern progress commences; and his southern when he enters Cancer (the 
summer solstice). 


Fifteen days of thirty Muhurttas each are called a Paksha (a lunar fortnight); two 



of these make a month; and two months, a solar season; three seasons a northern 
or southern declination (Ayana); and those two compose a year. Years, made up 
of four kinds of months, are distinguished into five kinds; and an aggregate of all 
the varieties of time is termed a Yoga, or cycle. The years are severally called 
Samvatsara, Parivatsara, Idvatsara, Anuvatsara, and Vatsara. This is the time 
called a Yuga. 

The mountain range that lies most to the north (in Bharata-varsha) is called 
Sringavan (the horned), from its having three principal elevations (horns or 
peaks), one to the north, one to the south, and one in the centre; the last is called 
the equinoctial, for the sun arrives there in the middle of the two seasons of 
spring and autumn, entering the equinoctial points in the first degree of Aries 
and of Libra, and making day and night of equal duration, or fifteen Muhurttas 
each. When the sun, most excellent sage, is in the first degree of the lunar 
mansion, Krittika, and the moon is in the. fourth of Visakha, or when the sun is 
in the third degree of Visakha, and the moon is in the head of Krittika (these 
positions being cotemporary with the equinoxes), that equinoctial season is holy 
(and is styled the Mahavishubha, or the great equinox). At this time offerings are 
to be presented to the gods and to the manes, and gifts are to be made to the 
Brahmans by serious persons; for such donations are productive of happiness. 
Liberality at the equinoxes is always advantageous to the donor: and day and 
night; seconds, minutes, and hours; intercalary months; the day of full moon 
(Paurnamasi); the day of conjunction (Amavasya), when the moon rises 
invisible; the day when it is first seen (Sinivali); the day when it first disappears 
(Kuhu); the day when the moon is quite round (Raka); and the day when one 
digit is deficient (Anumati), are all seasons when gifts are meritorious. 

The sun is in his northern declination in the months Tapas, Tapasya, Madhu, 
Madhava, Sukra, and Suchi; and in his southern in those of Nabhas, Nabhasya, 
Isha, Urja, Sahas, Sahasya. 

On the Lokaloka mountain, which I have formerly described to you, reside the 
four holy protectors of the world; or Sudhaman and Sankhapad, the two sons of 
Kardama, and Hiranyaroman, and Ketumat. Unaffected by the contrasts of 
existence, void of selfishness, active, and unencumbered by dependants, they 
take charge of the spheres, themselves abiding on the four cardinal points of the 
Lokaloka mountain. 



On the north of Agastya, and south of the line of the Goat, exterior to the 
Vaiswanara path, lies the road of the Pitris. There dwell the great Rishis, the 
offerers of oblations with fire, reverencing the Vedas, after whose injunctions 
creation commenced, and who were discharging the duties of ministrant priests: 
for as the worlds are destroyed and renewed, they institute new rules of conduct, 
and reestablish the interrupted ritual of the Vedas. Mutually descending from 
each other, progenitor springing from descendant, and descendant from 
progenitor, in the alternating succession of births, they repeatedly appear in 
different housed and races along with their posterity, devout practices and 
instituted observances, residing to the south of the solar orb, as long as the moon 
and stars endure. 

The path of the gods lies to the north of the solar sphere, north of the Nagavithi, 
and south of the seven Rishis. There dwell the Siddhas, of subdued senses, 
continent and pure, undesirous of progeny, and therefore victorious over death: 
eighty-eight thousand of these chaste beings tenant the regions of the sky, north 
of the sun, until the destruction of the universe: they enjoy immortality, for that 
they are holy; exempt from covetousness and concupiscence, love and hatred; 
taking no part in the procreation of living beings, and detecting the unreality of 
the properties of elementary matter. By immortality is meant existence to the end 
of the Kalpa: life as long as the three regions (earth, sky, and heaven) last is 
called exemption from (reiterated) death. The consequences of acts of iniquity or 
piety, such as Brahmanicide or an Aswamedha, endure for a similar period, or 
until the end of a Kalpa, when all within the interval between Dhruva and the 
earth is destroyed. 

The space between the seven Rishis and Dhruva, the third region of the sky, is 
the splendid celestial path of Vishnu (Vishnupada), and the abode of those 
sanctified ascetics who are cleansed from every soil, and in whom virtue and 
vice are annihilated. This is that excellent place of Vishnu to which those repair 
in whom all sources of pain are extinct, in consequence of the cessation of the 
consequences of piety or iniquity, and where they never sorrow more. There 
abide Dharma, Dhruva, and other spectators of the world, radiant with the 
superhuman faculties of Vishnu, acquired through religious meditation; and there 
are fastened and inwoven to all that is, and all that shall ever be, animate or 
inanimate. The seat of Vishnu is contemplated by the wisdom of the Yogis, 



identified with supreme light, as the radiant eye of heaven. In this portion of the 
heavens the splendid Dhruva is stationed, and serves for the pivot of the 
atmosphere. On Dhruva rest the seven great planets, and on them depend the 
clouds. The rains are suspended in the clouds, and from the rains come the water 
which is the nutriment and delight of all, the gods and the rest; and they, the 
gods, who are the receivers of oblations, being nourished by burnt-offerings, 
cause the rain to fall for the support of created beings. This sacred station of 
Vishnu, therefore, is the support of the three worlds, as it is the source of rain. 

From that third region of the atmosphere, or seat of Vishnu, proceeds the stream 
that washes away all sin, the river Ganga, embrowned with the unguents of the 
nymphs of heaven, who have sported in her waters. Having her source in the nail 
of the great toe of Vishnu's left foot, Dhruva receives her, and sustains her day 
and night devoutly on his head; and thence the seven Rishis practise the 
exercises of austerity in her waters, wreathing their braided locks with her 
waves. The orb of the moon, encompassed by her accumulated current, derives 
augmented lustre from her contact. Falling from on high, as she issues from the 
moon; she alights on the summit of Meru, and thence flows to the four quarters 
of the earth, for its purification. The Sita, Alakananda, Chakshu, and Bhadra are 
four branches of but one river, divided according to the regions towards which it 
proceeds. The branch that is known as the Alakananda was borne affectionately 
by Mahadeva, upon his head, for more than a hundred years, and was the river 
which raised to heaven the sinful sons of Sagara, by washing their ashes. The 
offences of any man who bathes in this river are immediately expiated, and 
unprecedented virtue is engendered. Its waters, offered by sons to their ancestors 
in faith for three years, yield to the latter rarely attainable gratification. Men of 
the twice-born orders, who offer sacrifice in this river to the lord of sacrifice, 
Purushottama, obtain whatever they desire, either here or in heaven. Saints who 
are purified from all soil by bathing in its waters, and whose minds are intent on 
Kesava, acquire thereby final liberation. This sacred stream, heard of, desired, 
seen, touched, bathed in, or hymned, day by day, sanctifies all beings; and those 
who, even at a distance of a hundred leagues, exclaim "Ganga, Ganga," atone for 
the sins committed during three previous lives. The place whence this river 
proceeds, for the purification of the three worlds, is the third division of the 
celestial regions, the seat of Vishnu. 





Footnotes 


01. The sun's car is 10.000 Yojanas broad, and as many deep, according to 
the Vayu and Matsya. The Bhagavata makes it thirty-six hundred 
thousand long, and one fourth that broad. The Linga agrees with the text. 

02. There is no great difference in this number in other accounts. The length 
of this axle, which extends from Meru to Manasa, is nearly equal to the 
semidiameter of the earth, which, according to the Matsya P., is 
18.950.000 Yojanas. 

03. The three naves are the three divisions of the day, morning, noon, and 
night; the five spokes are the five cyclic years; and the six peripheries are 
the six seasons. The Bhagavata explains the three naves to be three 
periods of the year, of four months each, and gives twelves spokes as 
types of the twelve months. The Vayu, Matsya, and Bhavishya Purarias 
enter into much more detail. According to them, the parts of the wheel 
are the same as above described: the body of the car is the year; its upper 
and lower half are the two solstices; Dharma is its flag; Artha and Kama 
the pins of the yoke and axle; night is its fender; Nimeshas form its floor; 
a moment is the axle-tree; an instant the pole; minutes are its attendants; 
and hours its harness. 

04. This shorter axle is, according to the Bhagavata, one fourth of the longer. 

05. We are to understand here, both in the axle and yoke, two levers, one 
horizontal, the other perpendicular. The horizontal arm of the axle has a 
wheel at one end; the other extremity is connected with the perpendicular 
arm. To the horizontal arm of the yoke are harnessed the horses; and its 
inner or right extremity is secured to the perpendicular. The upper ends 
of both perpendiculars are supposed to be attached to Dhruva, the pole- 
star, by two aerial cords, which are lengthened in the sun's southern 
course, and shortened in his northern; and retained by which to Dhruva, 
as to a pivot, the wheel of the car traverses the summit of the 
Manasottara mountain on Pushkara-dwipa, which runs like a ring round 
the several continents and oceans. The contrivance is commonly 
compared to an oil mill, and was probably suggested by that machine as 
constructed in India. As the Manasottara mountain is but 50.000 leagues 
high, and Meru 84.000, whilst Dhruva is 1500.000, both levers are 
inclined at obtuse angles to the nave of the wheel and each other. In 


images of the sun, two equal and semicircular axles connect a central 
wheel with the sides of the car. 

06. In the Linga the city of Indra is called Amaravati; and in it and the Vayu 
that of Varuna is termed Sukha. 

07. The terms Purva and Apara mean properly 'before and behind;' but 
'before' naturally denotes the east, either because men, according to a text 
of the Vedas, spontaneously face, as if to welcome the rising sun, or 
because they are enjoined by the laws so to do. When they face the rising 
sun, the west is of course behind them. The same circumstance 
determines the application of the term Dakshina, properly 'right,' Senior;, 
or 'dexterum,' to the south. Uttara, 'other' or 'last,' necessarily implies the 
north. 

08. This is rather obscure, but it is made out clearly enough in the 
commentary, and in the parallel passages in the Vayu, Matsya, Linga, 
Kurma, and Bhagavata. The sun travels round the world, keeping Meru 
always on his right: to the spectator who fronts him therefore, as he rises, 
Meru must be always on the north; and as the sun's rays do not penetrate 
beyond the centre of the mountain, the regions beyond, or to the north of 
it, must be in darkness; whilst those on the south of it must be in light: 
north and south being relative, not absolute terms, depending upon the 
position of the spectator with regard to the sun and to Meru. So the 
commentator: ###. It was probably through some misapprehension of 
this doctrine that Major Wilford asserted, "by Meru the Pauraniks 
understand in general the north pole, but the context of the Puranas is 
against this supposition." As. Res. VIII. 286. There is no inconsistency, 
however, in Meru's being absolutely in the centre of the world, and 
relatively north to the inhabitants of the several portions, to all of whom 
the east is that quarter where the sun first appears, and the other quarters 
are thereby regulated. 

09. Similar notions are contained in the Vayu. 

10. The sun travels at the rate of one-thirtieth of the earth's circumference in 
a Muhurtta, or 31.50.000 Yojanas; making the total 9 crores and 45 lakhs, 
or 9.45.00.000; according to the Vayu, Lingo, and Matsya Puranas. 

11. This passage, which is somewhat at variance with the general doctrine, 
that the length of the day depends upon the velocity of the sun's course, 
and which has not been noticed in any other Pauranik text, is defended by 
the commentator, upon the authority of the Jyotishsastra, or astronomical 



writings. According to them, he asserts, the signs of the Zodiac are of 
different extent. Aquarius, Pisces, and Aries are the shortest; Taurus, 
Capricornus, and Gemini are something longer; Leo and Scorpio longer 
still; and the remaining four the longest of all. According to the six which 
the sun traverses, the day or night will be the longer or shorter. The text 
is, ###. The apparent contradiction may however be reconciled by 
understanding the sun's slow motion, and the length of a sign, to be 
equivalent terms. 

12. The same story occurs in the Vayu, with the addition that the Mandehas 
are three crores in number. It seems to be an ancient legend, imperfectly 
preserved in some of the Puranas. 

13. The sacred syllable Om has been already described (n. 1). The Gayatri, or 
holiest verse of the Vedas, not to be uttered to ears profane, is a short 
prayer to the sun, identified as the supreme, and occurs in the tenth hymn 
of the fourth section of the third Ashtaka of the Sanhita of the Rig-veda: 
'We meditate on that excellent light of the divine sun: may he illuminate 
our minds.' Such is the fear entertained of profaning this text, that 
copyists of the Vedas not unfrequently refrain from transcribing it, both 
in the Sanhita and Bhashya. 

14. Or, in the text, with the prayer that commences with the words Surya 
jyotir, 'That which is in the sun (or light) is adorable,' &c. The whole 
prayer is given in Colebrooke's account of the religious ceremonies of the 
Hindus. As. Res. V. 355. 

15. But this comprehends the two Sandhyas, 'morning and evening twilight.' 
Two Naris, or half a Muhurtta before sunrise, constitute the morning 
Sandhya; and the same interval after sunset the evening. Sandhya, 
meaning 'junction,' is so termed as it is the juncture or interval between 
darkness and light; as in the Vayu and Matsya: ###. 

16. The four months are named in the Vayu, and are, 1. the Saura, or solar- 
sydereal, consisting of the sun's passage through a sign of the Zodiac: 2. 
the Saumya or Chandra or lunar month, comprehending thirty lunations 
or Tithis, and reckoned most usually from new moon to new moon, 
though sometimes from full moon to full moon: 3. the Savana or solar 
month, containing thirty days of sunrise and sunset: and 4. the Nakshatra 
or lunarasterismal month, which is the moon's revolution through the 
twenty-eight lunar mansions. 

17. The five years forming this Yuga, or cycle, differ only in denomination, 



being composed of the months above described, with such Malamasas, or 
intercalary months, as may be necessary to complete the period, 
according to Vriddha Garga. The cycle comprehends, therefore, sixty 
solar- sydereal months of 1800 days; sixty-one solar months, or 1830 
days; sixty-two lunar months, or 1860 lunations; and sixty-seven lunar- 
asterismal months, or 1809 such days. Col. Warren, in his Kala Sankalita, 
considers these years to be severally cycles. "In the cycle of sixty," he 
observes, "are contained five cycles of twelve years, each supposed equal 
to one year of the planet (Jupiter). I only mention this cycle because I 
found it mentioned in some books; but I know of no nation nor tribe that 
reckons time after that account. The names of the five cycles, or Yugs, 
are, 1. Samvatsara, 2. Parivatsara, 3. Idvatsara, 4. Anuvatsara, 5. 
Udravatsara. The name of each year is determined from the Nakshatra, in 
which Vrihaspati sets and rises heliacally, and they follow in the order of 
the lunar months." K. S. 212. It may be reasonably doubted, however, if 
this view be correct; and the only connexion between the cycle of five 
years and that of Vrihaspati may be the multiplication of the former by 
the latter (5 x 12), so as to form the cycle of sixty years: a cycle based, 
the commentator remarks, upon the conjunction (Yuga) of the sun and 
moon in every sixtieth year. The original and properly Indian cycle, 
however, is that of five years, as Bentley remarks. "The astronomers of 
this period (1181 B. C.) framed a cycle of five years for civil and 
religious ceremonies." Ancient and modern Hindu Astronomy. It is in 
fact, as Mr. Colebrooke states, the cycle of the Vedas, described in the 
Jyotish, or astronomical sections, and specified in the institutes of 
Parasara as the basis of calculation for larger cycles. As. Res. VIII. 470. 

18. Reference is here made apparently, though indistinctly, to those positions 
of the planets which indicate, according to Bentley, the formation of the 
lunar mansions by Hindu astronomers, about 1424 B. C. Hindu 
Astronomy. The Vayu and Linga Purarias specify the positions of the 
other planets at the same time, or the end, according to the former, of the 
Chakshusha Manwantara. At that time the sun was in Visakha, the moon 

r r 

in Krittika, Venus in Pushya, Jupiter in Purvaphalguni, Mars in Ashadha, 

r r r 

Budha in Dhanishtha, Sani in Revati, Ketu in Aslesha, and Rahu in 
Bharani. There are differences between some of these and the positions 
cited by Bentley, but most of them are the same. He considers them to 
have been observations of the occultations of the moon by the planets, in 


the respective lunar mansions, 1424-5 B. C. According to the Vayu, these 
positions or origins of the planets are from the Vedas: ###. The Linga, 
less accurately perhaps, reads ### referring it to the works of law. 

19. These are the names of the months which occur in the Vedas, and belong 
to a system now obsolete, as was noticed by Sir Wm. Jones. As. Res. III. 
258. According to the classification of the text, they correspond severally 
with the lunar months Magha, Phalguna, Chaitra, Vaisakha, Jyeshtha, 
Asharha, or from December to June; and with Sravana, Bhadra, Aswina, 
Kartika, Agrahayana, and Pausha, from July to December. From this 
order of the two series of the months, as occurring in the Vedas, Mr. 
Colebrooke infers, upon astronomical computations, their date to be 
about fourteen centuries prior to the Christian era. As. Res. VII. 283. 

20. The Vayu has the same names, but ascribes a different descent to the 
first, making Sudhaman the son of Viraja. Sankhapad is the son of 
Kardama: the other two are the sons of Parjanya and Rajas, consistently 
with the origin ascribed to these Lokapalas in the patriarchal genealogies 
of that Purana. 

21. Allusion is here made to some divisions of the celestial sphere which are 
not described in any other part of the text. The fullest, but still in some 
respects a confused and partly inaccurate account is given in the Matsya 
Purana; but a more satisfactory description occurs in the comment on the 
Bhagavata, there cited from the Vayu, but not found in the copies 
consulted on the present occasion. According to those details, the path 
(Marga) of the sun and other planets amongst the lunar asterisms is 
divided into three portions or Avashthanas, northern, southern, and 
central, called severally Airavata, Jaradgava (Ajagava, Matsya P.), and 
Vaiswanara. Each of these, again, is divided into three parts or Vithis: 
those of the northern portion are termed Nagavithi, Gajavithi, and 
Airavati; those of the centre are Arshabhi Govithi, and Jaradgavi; and 
those of the south are named Ajavithi, Mrigavithi, and Vaiswanari. Each 
of these Vithis comprises three asterisms. 


Nagavithi 

Aswini 

Bharafh 

Krittika 

Gajavithi 

Rohini 

Mrigasiras 














Ardra 

Airavati 

Punarvasu 

Pushya 

Aslesha 

Arshabhi 

Magha 

Purvaphalguni 

Uttaraphalguni 

Govithi 

Hasta 

Chitra 

Swati 

Jaradgavi 

Visakha 

Anuradha 

r 

Jyeshtha 

Ajavithi 

Mula 

Purvashadha 

Uttarashadha 

Mrigavithi 

Sravana 

r 

Dhanishtha 

Satabhisha 

Vaiswanari 

Purva Bhadrapada 
Uttara Bhadrapada 
Revati. 


See also As. Res. IX. table of Nakshatras, 346. Agastya is Canopus; and 
the line of the goat, or Ajavlthi, comprises asterisms which contain stars 
in Scorpio and Sagittarius. 

22. A marginal note in one MS. explains the phrase of the text, ### to signify 
as far as to the moon and stars; but the Pitri yana, or path of the Pitris, 
lies amongst the asterisms; and, according to the Paurariik system of the 
heavens, it is not clear what could be meant by its being bounded by the 
moon and stars. The path south of the solar orb is, according to the 
Vedas, that of smoke or darkness. 

23. The stars of the Nagavithi are those of Aries and Taurus; and by the 
seven Rishis we are here to understand Ursa Major. 

24. This, according to the Vedas, is all that is to be understood of the 



















immortality of the gods: they perish at the period of universal dissolution. 

25. That is, generally as affecting created beings, not individuals, whose acts 
influence their several successive births. 

26. From Ursa Major to the polar star. 

27. The popular notion is, that Siva or Mahadeva receives the Ganges on his 
head; but this, as subsequently explained, is referred, by the Vaishnavas 
at least, to the descent of the Alakananda, or Ganges of India, not to the 
celestial Ganges. 

28. Or, in other words, 'flows into the sea.' The legend here alluded to is 
more fully detailed in a subsequent book. 

29. The situation of the source of the Ganges of heaven identifies it with the 
milky way. 




09. Chapter 


Planetary system, under the type of a Sisumara or porpoise. The earth nourished 
by the sun. Of rain whilst the sun shines. Of rain from clouds. Rain the support, 
of vegetation, and thence of animal life. Narayana the support of all beings. 

THE form of the mighty Hari which is present in heaven, consisting of the 
constellations, is that of a porpoise, with Dhruva situated in the tail. As Dhruva 
revolves, it causes the moon, sun, and stars to turn round also; and the lunar 
asterisms follow in its circular path; for all the celestial luminaries are in fact 
bound to the polar-star by aerial cords. The porpoise-like figure of the celestial 
sphere is upheld by Narayana, who himself, in planetary radiance, is seated in its 
heart; whilst the son of Uttanapada, Dhruva, in consequence of his adoration of 
the lord of the world, shines in the tail of the stellar porpoise. The upholder of 
the porpoise-shaped sphere is the sovereign of all, Janarddana. This sphere is the 
supporter of Dhruva; and by Dhruva the sun is upstayed. Upon the sun depends 
this world, with its gods, demons, and men. In what manner the world depends 
upon the sun, be attentive, and you shall hear. 

During eight months of the year the sun attracts the waters, which are the 
essence of all fluids, and then pours them upon earths (during the other four 
months) as rain from rain grows corn; and by corn the whole world subsists. The 
sun with his scorching rays absorbs the moisture of the earth, and with them 
nourishes the moon. The moon communicates, through tubes of air, its dews to 
the clouds, which, being composed of smoke, fire, and wind (or vapour), can 
retain the waters with which they are charged: they are therefore called Abhras, 
because their contents are not dispersed. When however they are broken to 
pieces by the wind, then watery stores descend, bland, and freed front every 
impurity by the sweetening process of time. The sun, Maitreya, exhales watery 
fluids from four sources, seas, rivers, the earth, and living creatures. The water 
that the sun has drawn up from the Ganga of the skies he quickly pours down 
with his rays, and without a cloud; and men who are touched by this pure rain 
are cleansed from the soil of sin, and never see hell: this is termed celestial 
ablution. That rain which falls whilst the sun is shining, and without a cloud in 
the sky, is the water of the heavenly Ganges, shed by the solar rays. If, however, 


rain falls from a bright and cloudless sky whilst the sun is in the mansion of 
Krittika and the other asterisms counted by odd numbers, as the third, fifth, &c., 
the water, although that of the Ganga of the sky, is scattered, by the elephants of 
the quarters, not by the rays of the sun: it is only when such rain falls, and the 
sun is in the even asterisms, that it is distributed by his beams. 

The water which the clouds shed upon earth is in truth the ambrosia of living 
beings, for it gives fertility to the plants which are the support of their existence. 
By this all vegetables grow and are matured, and become the means of 
maintaining life. With them, again, those men who take the law for their light 
perform daily sacrifices, and through them give nourishment to the gods. And 
thus sacrifices, the Vedas, the font' castes, with the Brahmans at their head, ah 
the residences of the gods, ah the tribes of animals, the whole world, all are 
supported by the rains by which food is produced. But the rain is evolved by the 
sun; the sun is sustained by Dhruva; and Dhruva is supported by the celestial 
porpoise-shaped sphere, which is one with Narayana. Narayana, the primeval 
existent, and eternally enduring, seated in the heart of the stellar sphere, is the 
supporter of all beings. 




Footnotes 

01. A more particular description of this porpoise occurs farther on. 

02. Consequently, the Linga P. observes, there is no waste of water in the 
universe, as it is in constant circulation. 

03. The theory of the clouds is more fully detailed in the Vayu, Linga, and 
Matsya Purarias: it is the same in its general tenor, but comprises 
additional circumstances. Clouds, according to those authorities, are of 
three classes: 1. Agneya, originating from fire or heat, or in other words 
evaporation: they are charged with wind and rain, and are of various 
orders, amongst which are those called Jimuta, from their supporting life; 
2. Brahmaja, born from the breath of Brahma: these are the clouds 
whence thunder and lightning proceed: and 3. Pakshaja, or clouds which 
were originally the wings of the mountains, and which were cut off by 
Indra: these are also termed Pushkaravarttakas, from their including 


water in their vortices: they are the largest and most formidable of all, 
and are those which, at the end of the Yugas and Kalpas, poor down the 
waters of the deluge. The shell of the egg of Brahma, or of the universe, 
is formed of the primitive clouds. 

04. According to the Vayu, the water scattered by the elephants of the 
quarters is in summer dew, and in winter snow; or the latter is brought by 
the winds from a city called Puridra, which lies between the Himavat and 
Hemakuta mountains, and falls down upon the former. In like manner, 
also, as heat radiates from the sun, so cold radiates from the moon. 




10. Chapter 


Names of the twelve Adityas. Names of the Rishis, Gandharbhas, Apsarasas, 
Yakshas, Uragas, and Rakshasas, who attend the chariot of the sun in each month 
of the year. Their respective functions. 

PARASARA.—Between the extreme northern and southern points the sun has to 
traverse in a year one hundred and eighty degrees, ascending and descending. 
His car is presided over by divine Adityas, Rishis, heavenly singers and nymphs, 
Yakshas, serpents, and Rakshasas (one of each being placed in it in every 
month). The Aditya Dhatri, the sage Pulastya, the Gandharba Tumburu, the 
nymph Kratusthala, the Yaksha Rathakrit, the serpent Vasuki, and the Rakshas 
Heti, always reside in the sun's car, in the month of Madhu or Chaitra, as its 
seven guardians. In Vaisakh or Madhava the seven are Aryamat, Pulaha, Nareda, 

r r 

Punjikasthali, Rathaujas, Kachanira, and Praheti. In Suchi or Jyeshtha they are 
Mitra, Atri, Haha, Mena, Rathaswana, Takshaka, and Paurusheya. In the month 
Sukra or Ashadha they are Varuna, Vasishtha, Huhu, Sahajanya, Rathachitra, 
Naga, and Budha. In the month Nabhas (or Sravana) they are Indra, Angiras, 
Viswavasu, Pramlocha, Srotas, and Elapatra (the name of both serpent and 
Rakshas). In the month Bhadrapada they are Vivaswat, Bhrigu, Ugrasena, 
Anumlocha, Apurana, Sankhapala, and Vyaghra. In the month of Aswin they are 
Pushan, Gautama, Suruchi, Ghritachi, Sushena, Dhananjaya, and Vata. In the 
month of Kartik they are Parjanya, Bharadwaja, (another) Viswavasu, Viswachi, 
Senajit, Airavata, and Chapa. In Agrahayana or Margasirsha they are Ansu, 
Kasyapa, Chitrasena, Urvasi, Tarkshya, Mahapadma, and Vidyut. In the month 

r r 

of Pausha, Bhaga, Kratu, Urnayu, Purvachitti, Arishtanemi, Karkotaka, and 
Sphurja are the seven who abide in the orb of the sun, the glorious spirits who 
scatter light throughout the universe. In the month of Magha the seven who are 
in the sun are Twashtri, Jamadagni, Dhritarashtra, Tilottama, Ritajit, Kambala, 
and Brahmapeta. Those who abide in the sun in the month Phalguna are Vishnu, 
Visvamitra, Suryaverchchas, Rambha, Satyajit, Aswatara, and Yajnapeta. 

In this manner, Maitreya, a troop of seven celestial beings, supported by the 
energy of Vishnu, occupies during the several months the orb of the sun. The 
sage celebrates his praise, and the Gandharba sings, and the nymph dances 


before him: the Rakshas attends upon his steps, the serpent harnesses his steeds, 
and the Yaksha trims the reins: the numerous pigmy sages, the Balakhilyas, ever 
surround his chariot. The whole troop of seven, attached to the sun's car, are the 
agents in the distribution of cold, heat, and rain, at their respective seasons. 


Footnotes 

01. It might be doubted whether the text meant 180 in each hemisphere or in 
both, but the sense is sufficiently clear in the Vayu, &c., and the number 
of Mandalas travelled in the year is 360: the Mandalas, 'circles' or 
'degrees,' being in fact the sun's diurnal revolutions, and their numbers 
corresponding with the days of the solar year; as in the Bhavishya P. 'The 
horses of the sun travel twice 180 degrees in a year, internal and external 
(to the equator), in the order of the days.' 

02. A similar enumeration of the attendants upon the sun's car occurs in the 
Vayu, &c. For Yakshas, the generic term there employed is Gramams, 
but the individuals are the same. The Kurma and Bhavishya refer the 
twelve Adityas to different months:— 



Vishnu. 

Kurma. 

Bhavishya. 

Dhatri 

Chaitra 

Vaisakha 

Kartika 

Aryamat 

Vaisakha 

Chaitra 

Vaisakha 

Mitra 

r 

Jyeshtha 

Margasirsha 

Margasirsha 

Varuria 

r r 

Ashadha 

Magha 

Bhadra 

Indra 

Sravana 

Jyeshtha 

Aswina 

Vivaswat 

Bhadra 

Sravana 

r 

Jyeshtha 

Pushan 

Aswina 

Phalguna 

Pausha 

Parjanya 

Kartika 

Aswina 

Sravana 

Ansu 

Margasirsha 

r r 

Ashadha 

r r 

Ashadha 

Bhaga 

Pausha 

Bhadra 

Magha 

r 

Twashtri 

Magha 

Kartika 

Phalguna 

















































flvishmi ||Phalguna fPausha ||Chaitra. 






11. Chapter 


The sun distinct from, and supreme over, the attendants on his car: identical with 
the three Vedas and with Vishnu: his functions. 

MAITREYA.—You have related to me, holy preceptor, the seven classes of 
beings who are ever present in the solar orb, and are the causes of heat and cold: 
you have also described to me their individual functions, sustained by the energy 
of Vishnu: but you have not told me the duty of the sun himself; for if, as you 
say, the seven beings in his sphere are the causes of heat, cold, and rain, how can 
it be also true, as you have before mentioned, that rain proceeds from the sun? or 
how can it be asserted that the sun rises, reaches the meridian, or sets, if these 
situations be the act of the collective seven. 

PARASARA.—I will explain to you, Maitreya, the subject of your inquiry. The 
sun, though identified with the seven beings in his orb, is distinct from them as 
their chief. The entire and mighty energy of Vishnu, which is called the three 
Vedas, or Rich, Yajush, and Saman, is that which enlightens the world, and 
destroys its iniquity. It is that also which, during the continuance of things, is 
present as Vishnu, actively engaged in the preservation of the universe, and 
abiding as the three Vedas within the sun. The solar luminary, that appears in 
every month, is nothing else than that very supreme energy of Vishnu which is 
composed of the three Vedas, influencing the motions of the planet; for the 
Richas (the hymns of the Rig-veda) shine in the morning, the prayers of the 
Yajush at noon, and the Vrihadrathantara and other portions of the Saman in the 
afternoon. This triple impersonation of Vishnu, distinguished by the titles of the 
three Vedas, is the energy of Vishnu, which influences the positions of the sun. 

But this triple energy of Vishnu is not limited to the sun alone, for Brahma, 
Purusha (Vishnu), and Rudra are also made up of the same triform essence. In 
creation it is Brahma, consisting of the Rig-veda in preservation it is Vishnu, 
composed of the Yajur-veda; and in destruction Rudra, formed of the Sama-veda, 
the utterance of which is consequently inauspicious. 

Thus the energy of Vishnu, made up of the three Vedas, and derived from the 


property of goodness, presides in the sun, along with the seven beings belonging 
to it; and through the presence of this power the planet shines with intense 
radiance, dispersing with his beams the darkness that spreads over the whole 
world: and hence the Munis praise him, the quiristers and nymphs of heaven sing 
and dance before him, and fierce spirits and holy sages attend upon his path. 
Vishnu, in the form of his active energy, never either rises or sets, and is at once 
the. sevenfold sun and distinct from it. In the same manner as a man approaching 
a mirror, placed upon a stand, beholds in it his own image, so the energy (or 
reflection) of Vishnu is never disjoined (from the sun's car, which is the stand of 
the mirror), but remains month by month in the sun (as in the mirror), which is 
there stationed. 

The sovereign sun, oh Brahman, the cause of day and night, perpetually 
revolves, affording delight to the gods, to the progenitors, and to mankind. 
Cherished by the Sushumna ray of the sun, the moon is fed to the full in the 
fortnight of its growth; and in the fortnight of its wane the ambrosia of its 
substance is perpetually drunk by the immortals, until the last day of the half 
month, when the two remaining digits are drunk by the progenitors: hence these 
two orders of beings are nourished by the sun. The moisture of the earth, which 
the sun attracts by his rays, he again parts with for the fertilization of the grain, 
and the nutriment of all terrestrial creatures; and consequently the sun is the 
source of subsistence to every class of living things, to gods, progenitors, 
mankind, and the rest. The sun, Maitreya, satisfies the wants of the gods for a 
fortnight (at a time); those of the progenitors once a month; and those of men 
and other animals daily. 




Footnotes 

01. This mysticism originates in part apparently from a misapprehension of 
metaphorical texts of the Vedas, such as 'that triple knowledge (the 
Vedas) shines;' and 'the hymns of the Rich shine;' and in part from the 
symbolization of the light of religious truth by the light of the sun, as in 
the Gayatri. n. 13. To these are to be added the sectarial notions of the 
Vaishnavas. 


02. The formulae of the Sama-veda are not to be used along with those of the 
Rich and Yajush, at sacrifices in general. 

03. The Vayu, Linga, and Matsya P. specify several of the rays of the sun 
from amongst the many thousands which they say proceed from him. Of 
these, seven are principal, termed Sushumna, Harikesa, Viswakarman, 
Viswakarya, Sampadvasu, Arvavasu, and Swaraj, supplying heat 
severally to the moon, the stars, and to Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, 
and Saturn. 




12. Chapter 


Description of the moon: his chariot, horses, and course: fed by the sun: drained 
periodically of ambrosia by the progenitors and gods. The chariots and horses of 
the planets: kept in their orbits by aerial chains attached to Dhruva. Typical 
members of the planetary porpoise. Vasudeva alone real. 

PARASARA.—The chariot of the moon has three wheels, and is drawn by ten 
horses, of the whiteness of the Jasmine, five on the right half (of the yoke), five 
on the left. It moves along the asterisms, divided into ranges, as before 
described; and, in like manner as the sun, is upheld by Dhruva; the cords that 
fasten it being tightened or relaxed in the same way, as it proceeds on its course. 
The horses of the moon, sprung from the bosom of the waters, drag the car for a 
whole Kalpa, as do the coursers of the sun. The radiant sun supplies the moon, 
when reduced by the draughts of the gods to a single Kala, with a single ray; and 
in the same proportion as the ruler of the night was exhausted by the celestials, it 
is replenished by the sun, the plunderer of the waters: for the gods, Maitreya, 
drink the nectar and ambrosia accumulated in the moon during half the month, 
and from this being their food they are immortal. Thirty-six thousand three 
hundred and thirty-three divinities drink the lunar ambrosia. When two digits 
remain, the moon enters the orbit of the sun, and abides in the ray called Ama; 
whence the period is termed Amavasya. In that orbit the moon is immersed for a 
day and night in the water; thence it enters the branches and shoots of the trees; 
and thence goes to the sun. Consequently any one who cuts off a branch, or casts 
down a leaf, when the moon is in the trees (the day of its rising invisible), is 
guilty of Brahmanicide. When the remaining portion of the moon consists of but 
a fifteenth part, the progenitors approach it in the afternoon, and drink the last 
portion, that sacred Kali which is composed of ambrosia, and contained in the 
two digits of the form of the moon. Having drank the nectar effused by the lunar 
rays on the day of conjunction, the progenitors are satisfied, and remain tranquil 
for the ensuing month. These progenitors (or Pitris) are of three classes, termed 
Saumyas, Varhishadas, and Agnishwattas. In this manner the moon, with its 
cooling rays, nourishes the gods in the light fortnight, the Pitris in the dark 
fortnight; vegetables, with the cool nectary aqueous atoms it sheds upon them; 
and through their developement it sustains men, animals, and insects; at the same 


time gratifying them by its radiance. 


The chariot of the son of Chandra, Budha or Mercury, is composed of the 
elementary substances air and fire, and is drawn by eight bay horses of the speed 
of the wind. The vast car of Sukra (Venus) is drawn by earth-born horses, is 
equipped with a protecting fender and a floor, armed with arrows, and decorated 
by a banner. The splendid car of Bhauma (Mars) is of gold, of an octagonal 
shape, drawn by eight horses, of a ruby red, sprung from fire. Vrihaspati 
(Jupiter), in a golden car drawn by eight pale-coloured horses, travels from sign 
to sign in the period of a year: and the tardy-paced Sani (Saturn) moves slowly 
along in a car drawn by piebald steeds. Eight black horses draw the dusky 
chariot of Rahu, and once harnessed are attached to it for ever. On the Parvas 
(the nodes, or lunar and solar eclipses), Rahu directs his course from the sun to 
the moon, and back again from the moon to the sun. The eight horses of the 
chariot of Ketu are of the dusky red colour of Lac, or of the smoke of burning 
straw. 

I have thus described to you, Maitreya, the chariots of the nine planets, all which 
are fastened to Dhruva by aerial cords. The orbs of all the planets, asterisms, and 
stars are attached to Dhruva, and travel accordingly in their proper orbits, being 
kept in their places by their respective bands of air. As many as are the stars, so 
many are the chains of air that secure them to Dhruva; and as they turn round, 
they cause the pole-star also to revolve. In the same manner as the oil-man 
himself, going round, causes the spindle to revolve, so the planets travel round, 
suspended by cords of air, which are circling round a (whirling) centre. The air, 
which is called Pravaha, is so termed because it bears along the planets, which 
turn round, like a disc of fire, driven by the aerial wheel. 

The celestial porpoise, in which Dhruva is fixed, has been mentioned, but you 
shall hear its constituent parts in more detail, as it is of great efficacy; for the 
view of it at night expiates whatever sin has been committed during the day; and 
those who behold it live as many years as there are stars in it, in the sky, or even 
more. Uttanapada is to be considered as its upper jaw; Sacrifice as its lower. 
Dharma is situated on its brow; Narayana in its heart. The Aswins are its two 
fore feet; and Varuna and Aryamat its two hinder legs. Samvatsara is its sexual 
organ; Mitra its organ of excretion. Agni, Mahendra, Kasyapa, and Dhruva, in 
succession, are placed in its tail; which four stars in this constellation never set. 



I have now described to you the disposition of the earth and of the stars; of the 
insular zones, with their oceans and mountains, their Varshas or regions, and 
their inhabitants: their nature has also been explained, but it may be briefly 
recapitulated. 

From the waters, which are the body of Vishnu, was produced the lotus-shaped 
earth, with its seas and mountains. The stars are Vishnu; the worlds are Vishnu; 
forests, mountains, regions, rivers, oceans are Vishnu: he is all that is, all that is 
not. He, the lord, is identical with knowledge, through which he is all forms, but 
is not a substance. You must conceive therefore mountains, oceans, and all the 
diversities of earth and the rest, are the illusions of the apprehension. When 
knowledge is pure, real, universal, independent of works, and exempt from 
defect, then the varieties of substance, which are the fruit of the tree of desire, 
cease to exist in matter. For what is substance? Where is the thing that is devoid 
of beginning, middle, and end, of one uniform nature? How can reality be 
predicated of that which is subject to change, and reassumes no more its original 
character? Earth is fabricated into a jar; the jar is divided into two halves; the 
halves are broken to pieces; the pieces become dust; the dust becomes atoms. 
Say, is this reality? though it be so understood by man, whose self-knowledge is 
impeded by his own acts. Hence, Brahman, except discriminative knowledge, 
there is nothing any where, or at any time, that is real. Such knowledge is but 
one, although it appear manifold, as diversified by the various consequences of 
our own acts. Knowledge perfect, pure, free from pain, and detaching the 
affections from all that causes affliction; knowledge single and eternal—is the 
supreme Vasudeva, besides whom there is nothing. The truth has been thus 
communicated to you by me; that knowledge which is truth; from which all that 
differs is false. That information, however, which is of a temporal and worldly 
nature has also been imparted to you; the sacrifice, the victim, the fire, the 
priests, the acid juice, the gods, the desire for heaven, the path pursued by acts of 
devotion and the rest, and the worlds that are their consequences, have been 
displayed to you. In that universe which I have described, he for ever migrates 
who is subject to the influence of works; but he who knows Vasudeva to be 
eternal, immutable, and of one unchanging, universal form, may continue to 
perform them, as thereby he enters into the deity. 





Footnotes 


01. So is the car, according to the Vayu. The orb of the moon, according to 
the Linga, is only congealed water; as that of the sun is concentrated 
heat. 

02. There is some indistinctness in this account, from a confusion between 
the division of the moon's surface into sixteen Kalas or phases, and its 
apportionment, as a receptacle of nectar, into fifteen Kalas or digits, 
corresponding to the fifteen lunations, on the fourteen of which, during 
the wane, the gods drink the amrita, and on the fifteenth of which the 
Pitris exhaust the remaining portion. The correspondence of the two 
distinctions appears to be intended by the text, which terms the remaining 
digit or Kala, composed of Amrita, the form or superficies of the two 
Kalas. This, the commentator observes, is the fifteenth, not the sixteenth. 
The commentator on our text observes, also, that the passage is 
sometimes read ###, Lava meaning 'a moment,' 'a short period.' The 
Matsya and Vayu express the parallel passage so as to avoid all 
perplexity, by specifying the two Kalas as referring to time, and leaving 
the number of nectareous Kalas undefined: 'They, the Pitris, drink the 
remaining Kalas in two Kalas of time.' Col. Warren explains Kala, or, as 
he 'writes it, Cala, in one of its acceptations, 'the phases of the moon, of 
which the Hindus count sixteen.' Kala Sankalita, 359. So the Bhagavata 
terms the moon, and the Vayu, after noticing the exhaustion of the 
fifteenth portion on the day of conjunction, states the recurrence of 
increase or wane to take place in the sixteenth phase at the beginning of 
each fortnight. 

03. The Vayu and Matsya add a fourth class, the Kavyas; identifying them 
with the cyclic years; the Saumyas and Agnishwattas with the seasons; 
and the Varhishads with the months. 

04. The Vayu makes the horses ten in number, each of a different colour. 

05. The Matsya, Linga, and Vayu add the circumstance of Rahu's taking up, 
on these occasions, the circular shadow of the earth. 

06. The different bands of air attached to Dhruva are, according to the 
commentator, varieties of the Pravaha wind; but the Kurma and Linga 
enumerate seven principal winds which perform this function, of which 
the Pravaha is one. 



07. The four last are therefore stars in the circle of perpetual apparition. One 
of these is the pole-star; and in Kasyapa we have a verbal affinity to 
Cassiopeia. The Sisumara, or porpoise, is rather a singular symbol for the 
celestial sphere; but it is not more preposterous than many of the 
constellations of classical fiction. The component parts of it are much 
more fully detailed, in the Bhagavata, whence it has been translated by 
Sir Wm. Jones. As. Res. II. 402. The Bhagavata, however, mystifies the 
description, and says it is nothing more than the Dhararia, or symbol, by 
which Vishnu, identified with the starry firmament, is to be impressed 
upon the mind in meditation. The account of the planetary system is, as 
usual, fullest in the Vayu, with which the Linga and Matsya nearly agree. 
The Bhavishya is nearly, also, the same. They all contain many passages 
common to them and to our text. In the Agni, Padma, Kurma, Brahma, 
Garuda, and Vamana descriptions occur which enter into less detail than 
the Vishnu, and often use its words, or passages found in other Purarias. 
Many intimations of a similar system occur in the Vedas, but whether the 
whole is to be found in those works is yet to be ascertained. It must not 
be considered as a correct representation of the philosophical astronomy 
of the Hindus, being mixed up with, and deformed by, mythological and 
symbolical fiction. 

08. Only, however, as far as they are intended to propitiate Vishnu, and not 
for any other purpose. 




13. Chapter 


Legend of Bharata. Bharata abdicates his throne, and becomes an ascetic: 
cherishes a fawn, and becomes so much attached to it as to neglect his devotions: 
he dies: his successive births: works in the fields, and is pressed as a palankin- 
bearer for the Raja of Sauvira: rebuked for his awkwardness: his reply: dialogue 
between him and the king. 

MAITREYA.—Reverend sir, all that I asked of you has been thoroughly 
explained; namely, the situation of the earth, oceans, mountains, rivers, and 
planetary bodies; the system of the three worlds, of which Vishnu is the stay. The 
great end of life has also been expounded by you, and the preeminence of holy 
knowledge. It now remains that you fulfil the promise you made some time 
since, of relating to me the story of king Bharata, and how it happened that a 
monarch like him, residing constantly at the sacred place Salagrama, and 
engaged in devotion, with his mind ever applied to Vasudeva, should have 
failed, through time sanctity of the shrine, and the efficacy of his abstractions, to 
obtain final emancipation; how it was that he was born again as a Brahman; and 
what was done by the magnanimous Bharata in that capacity: all this it is fit that 
you inform me. 

PARASARA.—The illustrious monarch of the earth resided, Maitreya, for a 
considerable period at Salagrama, his thoughts being wholly dedicated to god, 
and his conduct distinguished by kindness and every virtue, until he had 
effected, in the highest degree, the entire control over his mind. The Raja was 
ever repeating the names, Yajnesa, Achyuta, Govinda, Madhava, Ananta, 
Kesava, Krishna, Vishnu, Hrishikesa; nothing else did be utter, even in his 
dreams; nor upon anything but those names, and their import, did he ever 
meditate. He accepted fuel, flowers, and holy grass, for the worship of the deity, 
but performed no other religious rites, being engrossed by disinterested, abstract 
devotion. 

On one occasion he went to the Mahanadi, for the purpose of ablution: he bathed 
there, and performed the ceremonies usual after bathing, Whilst thus occupied, 
there came to the same place a doe big with young, who had come out of the 


forest to drink of the stream. Whilst quenching her thirst, there was heard on a 
sudden the loud and fearful roaring of a lion; on which the doe, being 
excessively alarmed, jumped out of the water upon the bank. In consequence of 
this great leap, her fawn was suddenly brought forth, and fell into the river; and 
the king, seeing it carried away by the current, caught hold of the young animal, 
and saved it from being drowned. The injury received by the deer, by her violent 
exertion, proved fatal, and she lay down, and died; which being observed by the 
royal ascetic, he took the fawn in his arms, and returned with it to his hermitage: 
there he fed it and tended it every day, and it throve and grew up under his care. 
It frolicked about the cell, and grazed upon the grass in its vicinity; and 
whenever it strayed to a distance, and was alarmed at a wild beast, it ran back 
thither for safety. Every morning it sallied forth from home, and every evening 
returned to the thatched shelter of the leafy bower of Bharata. 

Whilst the deer was thus the inmate of his hermitage, the mind of the king was 
ever anxious about the animal, now wandering away, and now returning to his 
side, and he was unable to think of anything else. He had relinquished his 
kingdom, his children, all his friends, and now indulged in selfish affection for a 
fawn. When absent for a longer time than ordinary, he would fancy that it had 
been carried off by wolves, devoured by a tiger, or slain by a lion. "The earth," 
he would exclaim, "is embrowned by the impressions of its hoofs. What has 
become of the young deer, that was born for my delight? How happy I should be 
if he had returned from the thicket, and I felt his budding antlers rubbing against 
my arm. These tufts of sacred grass, of which the heads have been nibbled by his 
new teeth, look like pious lads chanting the Sanaa-veda." Thus the Muni 
meditated whenever the deer was long absent from him; and contemplated him 
with a countenance animated with pleasure as he stood by his side. His 
abstraction was interrupted, the spirit of the king being engrossed by the fawn, 
even though he had abandoned family, wealth, and dominion. The firmness of 
the prince's mind became unsteady, and wandered with the wanderings of the 
young deer. In the course of time the king became subject to its influence. He 
died, watched by the deer, with tears in its eyes, like a son mourning for his 
father; and he himself, as he expired, cast his eyes upon the animal, and thought 
of nothing else, being wholly occupied with one idea. 

In consequence of this predominant feeling at such a season, he was born again, 
in the Jambumarga forests, as a deer, with the faculty of recollecting his former 



life; which recollection inspiring a distaste for the world, he left his mother, and 
again repaired to the holy place Salagrama. Subsisting there upon dry grass and 
leaves, he atoned for the acts which had led to his being born in such a 
condition; and upon his death he was next born as a Brahman, still retaining the 
memory of his prior existence. He was born in a pious and eminent family of 
ascetics, who were rigid observers of devotional rites. Possessed of all true 
wisdom, and acquainted with the essence of all sacred writings, he beheld soul 
as contradistinguished from matter (Prakriti). Embued with knowledge of self, 
he beheld the gods and all other beings as in reality the same. It did not happen 
to him to undergo investiture with the Brahmanical thread, nor to read the Vedas 
with a spiritual preceptor, nor to perform ceremonies, nor to study the scriptures. 
Whenever spoken to, he replied incoherently and in ungrammatical and 
unpolished speech. His person was unclean, and he was clad in dirty garments. 
Saliva dribbled from his mouth, and he was treated with contempt by all the 
people. Regard for the consideration of the world is fatal to the success of 
devotion. The ascetic who is despised of men attains the end of his abstractions. 
Let therefore a holy man pursue the path of the righteous, without murmuring; 
and though men contemn him, avoid association with mankind. This, the counsel 
of Hiranyagarbha, did the Brahman call to mind, and hence assumed the 
appearance of a crazy ideot in the eyes of the world. His food was raw pulse, 
potherbs, wild fruit, and grains of corn. Whatever came in his way he ate, as part 
of a necessary, but temporary infliction. Upon his father's death he was set to 
work in the fields by his brothers and his nephews, and fed by them with vile 
food; and as he was firm and stout of make, and a simpleton in outward act, he 
was the slave of every one that chose to employ him, receiving sustenance alone 
for his hire. 

The head servant of the king of Sauvira, looking upon him as an indolent, 
untaught Brahman, thought him a fit person to work without pay (and took him 
into his master's service to assist in carrying the palankin.) 

The king having ascended his litter, on one occasion, was proceeding to the 
hermitage of Kapila, on the banks of the Ikshumati river, to consult the sage, to 
whom the virtues leading to liberation were known, what was most desirable in a 
world abounding with care and sorrow. Amongst those who by order of his head 
servant had been compelled gratuitously to carry the litter was the Brahman, 
who had been equally pressed into this duty, and who, endowed with the only 



universal knowledge, and remembering his former existence, bore the burden as 
the means of expiating the faults for which he was desirous to atone. Fixing his 
eyes upon the pole, he went tardily along, whilst the other bearers moved with 
alacrity; and the king, feeling the litter carried unevenly, called out, "Ho bearers! 
what is this? Keep equal pace together." Still it proceeded unsteadily, and the 
Raja again exclaimed, "What is this? how irregularly are you going!" When this 
had repeatedly occurred, the palankin-bearers at last replied to the king, "It is 
this man, who lags in his pace." "How is this?" said the prince to the Brahman, 
"are you weary? You have carried your burden but a little way; are you unable to 
bear fatigue? and yet you look robust." The Brahman answered and said, "It is 
not I who am robust, nor is it by me that your palankin is carried. I am not 
wearied, prince, nor am I incapable of fatigue." The king replied, "I clearly see 
that you are stout, and that the palankin is borne by you; and the carriage of a 
burden is wearisome to all persons." "First tell me," said the Brahman, "what it is 
of me that you have clearly seen, and then you may distinguish my properties as 
strong or weak. The assertion that you behold the palankin borne by me, or 
placed on me, is untrue. Listen, prince, to what I have to remark. The place of 
both the feet is the ground; the legs are supported by the feet; the thighs rest 
upon the legs; and the belly reposes on the thighs; the chest is supported by the 
belly; and the arms and shoulders are propped up by the chest: the palankin is 
borne upon the shoulders, and how can it be considered as my burden? This 
body which is seated in the palankin is defined as Thou; thence what is 
elsewhere called This, is here distinguished as I and Thou. I and thou and others 
are constructed of the elements; and the elements, following the stream of 
qualities, assume a bodily shape; but qualities, such as goodness and the rest, are 
dependant upon acts; and acts, accumulated in ignorance, influence the condition 
of all beings. The pure, imperishable soul, tranquil, void of qualities, preeminent 
over nature (Prakriti), is one, without increase or diminution, in all bodies. But if 
it be equally exempt from increase or diminution, then with what propriety can 
you say to me, 'I see that thou art robust?' If the palankin rests on the shoulders, 
and they on the body; the body on the feet, and the feet on the earth; then is the 
burden borne as much by you as by me. When the nature of men is different, 
either in its essence or its cause, then may it be said that fatigue is to be 
undergone by me. That which is the substance of the palankin is the substance of 
you and me and all others, being an aggregate of elements, aggregated by 
individuality." 



Having thus spoken, the Brahman was silent, and went on bearing the palankin; 
but the king leaped out of it, and hastened to prostrate himself at his feet; saying, 
"Have compassion on me, Brahman, and cast aside the palankin; and tell me 
who thou art, thus disguised under the appearance of a fool." The Brahman 
answered and said, "Hear me, Raja,. Who I am it is not possible to say: arrival at 
any place is for the sake of fruition; and enjoyment of pleasure, or endurance of 
pain, is the cause of the production of the body. A living being assumes a 
corporeal form to reap the results of virtue or vice. The universal cause of all 
living creatures is virtue or vice: why therefore inquire the cause (of my being 
the person I appear)." The king said, "Undoubtedly virtue and vice are the causes 
of all existent effects, and migration into several bodies is for the purpose of 
receiving their consequences; but with respect to what you have asserted, that it 
is not possible for you to tell me who you are, that is a matter which I am 
desirous to hear explained. How can it be impossible, Brahman, for any one to 
declare himself to be that which he is? There can be no detriment to one's-self 
from applying to it the word I." The Brahman said, "It is true that there is no 
wrong done to that which is one's-self by the application to it of the word I; but 
the term is characteristic of error, of conceiving that to be the self (or soul) which 
is not self or soul. The tongue articulates the word I, aided by the lips, the teeth, 
and the palate; and these are the origin of the expression, as they are the causes 
of the production of speech. If by these instruments speech is able to utter the 
word I, it is nevertheless improper to assert that speech itself is I. The body of a 
man, characterized by hands, feet, and the like, is made up of various parts; to 
which of these can I properly apply the denomination I? If another being is 
different specifically from me, most excellent monarch, then it may be said that 
this is I; that is the other: but when one only soul is dispersed in all bodies, it is 
then idle to say, Who are you? who am I? Thou art a king; this is a palankin; 
these are the bearers; these the running footmen; this is thy retinue: yet it is 
untrue that all these are said to be thine. The palankin on which thou sittest is 
made of timber derived from a tree. What then? is it denominated either timber 
or a tree? People do not say that the king is perched upon a tree, nor that he is 
seated upon a piece of wood, when you have mounted your palankin. The 
vehicle is an assemblage of pieces of timber, artificially joined together: judge, 
prince, for yourself in what the palankin differs really from the wood. Again; 
contemplate the sticks of the umbrella, in their separate state. Where then is the 
umbrella? Apply this reasoning to thee and to me. A man, a woman, a cow, a 
goat, a horse, an elephant, a bird, a tree, are names assigned to various bodies, 



which are the consequences of acts. Man is neither a god, nor a man, nor a brute, 
nor a tree; these are mere varieties of shape, the effects of acts. The thing which 
in the world is called a king, the servant of a king, or by any other appellation, is 
not a reality; it is the creature of our imaginations: for what is there in the world, 
that is subject to vicissitude, that does not in the course of time go by different 
names. Thou art called the monarch of the world; the son of thy father; the 
enemy of thy foes; the husband of thy wife; the father of thy children. What shall 
I denominate thee? How art thou situated? Art thou the head or the belly? or are 
they thine? Art thou the feet? or do they belong to thee? Thou art, oh king, 
distinct in thy nature from all thy members! Now then, rightly understanding the 
question, think who I am; and how it is possible for me, after the truth is 
ascertained (of the identity of all), to recognise any distinction, or to speak of my 
own individuality by the expression I.' 


Footnotes 

01. One copy addresses Parasara, Bhagavan sarvabhutesa, 'Sacred sovereign, 
lord of all creatures;' rather an unusual title for a sage, even though an 
inspired one. The other two copies begin, Samyagakhyatam, 'All has 
been thoroughly explained.' 

02. The Mahanadi is properly a river in Orissa, but the name is applicable to 
any great stream, and its connexion with Salagrama Tirtha makes it 
probable that it is intended for the Gandaki or Gandaka, in which the 
Salagram or Ammonite is most abundantly found. It may be here noticed 
that Salagrama is named amongst the Tirthas in the Mahabharata. 

03. The applicability of this simile is not explained by the commentator: it 
refers possibly to the cropped or shaven heads of the religious students. 

04. According to the Bhagavata, Jambumarga is the Kalanjara mountain or 
Kalanjar in Bundelkhand. 

05. Hirariyagarbha or Brahma is named here instead of the Yoga doctrine, 
which is sometimes ascribed to him as its author. 

06. As a Kala sanyama, a state of suffering or mortification lasting only for a 
season; or, in other words, bodily existence; the body being contemplated 
as a sore, for which food is the unguent; drink, the lotion; and dress, the 


bandage. 

07. A river in the north of India. 

08. That is, What have you discerned of me, my body, life, or soul? 

09. The condition—that is, the personal individuality—of any one is the 
consequence of his acts; but the same living principle animates him 
which is common to all living things. 

10. The body is not the individual; therefore it is not the individual, but the 
body, or eventually the earth, which bears the burden. 

11. That is, speech, or any or all of the faculties or senses, is not soul. 

12. The aggregate limbs and senses no more constitute the individual, than 
the accidental combination of certain pieces of wood makes the fabric 
anything else than wood: in like manner as the machine is still timber, so 
the body is still mere elementary matter. Again; the senses and limbs, 
considered separately, no more constitute the man, than each individual 
stick constitutes the umbrella. Whether separate or conjoined, therefore, 
the parts of the body are mere matter; and as matter does not make up 
man, they do not constitute an individual. 

13. The term in this and the preceding clause is Puman; here used 
generically, there specifically. 




14. Chapter 


Dialogue continued. Bharata expounds the nature of existence, the end of life, 
and the identification of individual with universal spirit. 

PARASARA.—Having heard these remarks, full of profound truth, the king was 
highly pleased with the Brahman, and respectfully thus addressed him: "What 
you have said is no doubt the truth; but in listening to it my mind is much 
disturbed. You have shewn that to be discriminative wisdom which exists in all 
creatures, and which is the great principle that is distinct from plastic nature; but 
the assertions—'I do not bear the palankin—the palankin does not rest upon me— 
the body, by which the vehicle is conveyed, is different from me—the conditions 
of elementary beings are influenced by acts, through the influence of the 
qualities, and the qualities are the principles of action;'—what sort of positions 
are these. Upon these doctrines entering into my ears, my mind, which is anxious 
to investigate the truth, is lost in perplexity. It was my purpose, illustrious sage, 
to have gone to Kapila Rishi, to inquire of him what in this life was the most 
desirable object: but now that I have heard from you such words, my mind turns 
to you, to become acquainted with the great end of life. The Rishi Kapila is a 
portion of the mighty and universal Vishnu, who has come down upon earth to 
dissipate delusion; and surely it is he who, in kindness to me, has thus 
manifested himself to me in all that you have said. To me, thus suppliant, then, 
explain what is the best of all things; for thou art an ocean overflowing with the 
waters of divine wisdom." The Brahman replied to the king, "You, again, ask me 
what is the best of all things, not what is the great end of life but there are many 
things which are considered best, as well as those which are the great ends (or 
truths) of life. To him who, by the worship of the gods, seeks for wealth, 
prosperity, children, or dominion, each of these is respectively best. Best is the 
rite or sacrifice, that is rewarded with heavenly pleasures. Best is that which 
yields the best recompense, although it be not solicited. Self-contemplation, ever 
practised by devout ascetics, is to them the best. But best of all is the 
identification of soul with the supreme spirit. Hundreds and thousands of 
conditions may be called the best; but these are not the great and true ends of 
life. Hear what those are. Wealth cannot be the true end of life, for it may be 
relinquished through virtue, and its characteristic property is expenditure for the 


gratification of desire. If a son were final truth, that would be equally applicable 
to a different source; for the son that is to one the great end of life, becomes the 
father of another. Final or supreme truth, therefore, would not exist in this world, 
as in all these cases those objects which are so denominated are the effects of 
causes, and consequently are not finite. If the acquisition of sovereignty were 
designated by the character of being the great end of all, then finite ends would 
sometimes be, and sometimes cease to be. If you suppose that the objects to be 
effected by sacrificial rites, performed according to the rules of the Rik, Yajur, 
and Sama Vedas, be the great end of life, attend to what I have to say. Any effect 
which is produced through the causality of earth partakes of the character of its 
origin, and consists itself of clay; so any act performed by perishable agents, 
such as fuel, clarified butter, and Kusa grass, must itself be of but temporary 
efficacy. The great end of life (or truth) is considered by the wise to be eternal; 
but it would be transient, if it were accomplished through transitory things. If 
you imagine that this great truth is the performance of religious acts, from which 
no recompense is sought, it is not so; for such acts are the means of obtaining 
liberation, and truth is (the end), not the means. Meditation on self, again, is said 
to be for the sake of supreme truth; but the object of this is to establish 
distinctions (between soul and body), and the great truth of all is without 
distinctions. Union of self with supreme spirit is said to be the great end of all; 
but this is false; for one substance cannot become substantially another. Objects, 
then, which are considered most desirable are infinite. What the great end of all 
is, you shall, monarch, briefly learn from me. It is soul: one (in all bodies), 
pervading, uniform, perfect, preeminent over nature (Prakriti), exempt from 
birth, growth, and decay, omnipresent, undecaying, made up of true knowledge, 
independent, and unconnected with unrealities, with name, species, and the rest, 
in time present, past, or to come. The knowledge that this spirit, which is 
essentially one, is in one's own and in all other bodies, is the great end, or true 
wisdom, of one who knows the unity and the true principles of things. As one 
diffusive air, passing through the perforations of a flute, is distinguished as the 
notes of the scale (Sherga and the rest), so the nature of the great spirit is single, 
though its forms be manifold, arising from the consequences of acts. When the 
difference of the investing form, as that of god or the rest, is destroyed, then 
there is no distinction." 




Footnotes 


01. You ask what is Sreyas, not what is Paramartha: the first means literally 
'best,' 'most excellent,' and is here used to denote temporary and special 
objects, or sources of happiness, as wealth, posterity, power, &c.; the 
latter is the one great object or end of life, true wisdom or truth, 
knowledge of the real and universal nature of soul. 

02. But this is to be understood as applying to the doctrines which 
distinguish between the vital spirit (Jivatma) and the supreme spirit 
(Paramatma), the doctrine of the Yoga. It is here argued, that it is absurd 
to talk of effecting a union between the soul of man and supreme soul; 
for if they are distinct essentially, they cannot combine; if they are 
already one and the same, it is nonsense to talk of accomplishing their 
union. The great end of life or truth is not to effect the union of two 
things, or two parts of one thing, but to know that all is unity. 




15. Chapter 


Bharata relates the story of Ribhu and Nidagha. The latter, the pupil of the 
former, becomes a prince, and is visited by his preceptor, who explains to him 
the principles of unity, and departs. 

PARASARA continued.—Having terminated these remarks, the Brahman 
repeated to the silent and meditating prince a tale illustrative of the doctrines of 
unity. "Listen, prince," he proceeded, "to what was formerly uttered by Ribhu, 
imparting holy knowledge to the Brahman Nidagha. Ribhu was a son of the 
supreme Brahma, who, from his innate disposition, was of a holy character, and 
acquainted with true wisdom. Nidagha, the son of Pulastya, was his disciple; and 
to him Ribhu communicated willingly perfect knowledge, not doubting of his 
being fully confirmed in the doctrines of unity, when he had been thus instructed. 

"The residence of Pulastya was at Viranagara, a large handsome city on the 
banks of the Devika river. In a beautiful grove adjoining to the stream the pupil 
of Ribhu, Nidagha, conversant with devotional practices, abode. When a 
thousand divine years had elapsed, Ribhu went to the city of Pulastya, to visit his 
disciple. Standing at the doorway, at the end of a sacrifice to the Viswadevas, he 
was seen by his scholar, who hastened to present him the usual offering, or 
Arghya, and conducted him into the house; and when his hands and feet were 
washed, and he was seated, Nidagha invited him respectfully to eat (when the 
following dialogue ensued):— 

"Ribhu. 'Tell me, illustrious Brahman, what food there is in your house; for I am 
not fond of indifferent viands.' 

"Nidagha. 'There are cakes of meal, rice, barley, and pulse in the house; partake, 
venerable sir, of whichever best pleases you.' 

"Ribhu. 'None of these do I like; give me rice boiled with sugar, wheaten cakes, 
and milk with curds and molasses.' 


"Nidagha. 'Ho dame, be quick, and prepare whatever is most delicate and sweet 


in the house, to feed our guest. 


"Having thus spoken, the wife of Nidagha, in obedience to her husband's 
commands, prepared sweet and savoury food, and set it before the Brahman; and 
Nidagha, having stood before him until he had eaten of the meal which he had 
desired, thus reverentially addressed him:— 

"Nidagha. 'Have you eaten sufficiently, and with pleasure, great Brahman? and 
has your mind received contentment from your food? Where is your present 
residence? whither do you purpose going? and whence, holy sir, have you now 
come?' 

"Ribhu. 'A hungry man, Brahman, must needs be satisfied when he has finished 
his meal. Why should you inquire if my hunger has been appeased? When the 
earthy element is parched by fire, then hunger is engendered; and thirst is 
produced when the moisture of the body has been absorbed (by internal or 
digestive heat). Hunger and thirst are the functions of the body, and satisfaction 
must always be afforded me by that by which they are removed; for when 
hunger is no longer sensible, pleasure and contentment of mind are faculties of 
the intellect: ask their condition of the mind then, for man is not affected by 
them. For your three other questions, Where I dwell? Whither I go? and Whence 
I come? hear this reply. Man (the soul of man) goes every where, and penetrates 
every where, like the ether; and is it rational to inquire where it is? or whence or 
whither thou goest? I neither am going nor coming, nor is my dwelling in any 
one place; nor art thou, thou; nor are others, others; nor am I, I. If you wonder 
what reply I should make to your inquiry why I made any distinction between 
sweetened and unsweetened food, you shall hear my explanation. What is there 
that is really sweet or not sweet to one eating a meal? That which is sweet, is no 
longer so when it occasions the sense of repletion; and that which is not sweet, 
becomes sweet when a man (being very hungry) fancies that it is so. What food 
is there that first, middle, and last is equally grateful. As a house built of clay is 
strengthened by fresh plaster, so is this earthly body supported by earthly 
particles; and barley, wheat, pulse, butter, oil, milk, curds, treacle, fruits, and the 
like, are composed of atoms of earth. This therefore is to be understood by you, 
that the mind which properly judges of what is or is not sweet is impressed with 
the notion of identity, and that this effect of identity tends to liberation.' 



"Having heard these words, conveying the substance of ultimate truth, Nidagha 
fell at the feet of his visitor, and said, 'Shew favour unto me, illustrious 
Brahman, and tell me who it is that for my good has come hither, and by whose 
words the infatuation of my mind is dissipated.' To this, Ribhu answered, 'I am 
Ribhu, your preceptor, come hither to communicate to you true wisdom; and 
having declared to you what that is, I shall depart. Know this whole universe to 
be the one undivided nature of the supreme spirit, entitled Vasudeva.' Thus 
having spoken, and receiving the prostrate homage of Nidagha, rendered with 
fervent faith, Ribhu went his way." 



16. Chapter 


Ribhu returns to his disciple, and perfects him in divine knowledge. The same 
recommended to the Raja by Bharata, who thereupon obtains final liberation. 
Consequences of hearing this legend. 

"AFTER the expiration of another thousand years, Ribhu again repaired to the 
city where Nidagha dwelt, to instruct him farther in true wisdom. When he 
arrived near the town, he beheld a prince entering into it, with a splendid retinue; 
and his pupil Nidagha standing afar off, avoiding the crowd; his throat shrivelled 
with starvation, and bearing from the thicket fuel and holy grass. Ribhu 
approached him, and saluting him reverentially (as if he was a stranger) 
demanded why he was standing in such a retired spot. Nidagha replied, 'There is 
a great crowd of people attending the entrance of the king into the town, and I 
am staying here to avoid it.' 'Tell me, excellent Brahman,' said Ribhu, 'for I 
believe that thou art wise, which is here the king, and which is any other man.' 
The king,' answered Nidagha, is he who is seated on the fierce and stately 
elephant, vast as a mountain peak; the others are his attendants.' You have shewn 
me,' observed Ribhu, 'at one moment the elephant and the king, without noticing 
any peculiar characteristic by which they may be distinguished. Tell me, 
venerable sir, is there any difference between them? for I am desirous to know 
which is here the elephant, which is the king.' 'The elephant,' answered Nidagha, 
'is underneath; the king is above him. Who is not aware, Brahman, of the relation 
between that which bears and that which is borne?' To this Ribhu rejoined, 'Still 
explain to me, according to what I know of it, this matter: what is it that is meant 
by the word underneath, and what is it that is termed above?' As soon as he had 
uttered this, Nidagha jumped upon Ribhu, and said, 'Here is my answer to the 
question you have asked: I am above, like the Raja.; you are underneath, like the 
elephant. This example, Brahman, is intended for your information.' Very well,' 
said Ribhu, you, it seems, are as it were the Raja, and I am like the elephant; but 
come now do you tell me which of us two is you; which is I.' 

"When Nidagha heard these words, he immediately fell at the feet o the stranger, 
and said, Of a surety thou art my saintly preceptor Ribhu the mind of no other 
person is so fully imbued with the doctrines of unity as that of my teacher, and 


hence I know that thou art he.' To this Ribhu replied, 'I am your preceptor, by 
name Ribhu, who, pleased with: the dutiful attention he has received, has come 
to Nidagha to give him instruction: for this purpose have I briefly intimated to 
you divine truth, the essence of which is the non-duality of all.' Having thus 
spoken to Nidagha, the Brahman Ribhu went away, leaving his disciple 
profoundly impressed, by his instructions, with belief in unity. He beheld all 
beings thenceforth as the same with himself, and, perfect in holy knowledge, 
obtained final liberation. 

"In like manner do thou, oh king, who knowest what duty is, regarding equally 
friend or foe, consider yourself as one with all that exists in the world. Even as 
the same sky is apparently diversified as white or blue, so Soul, which is in truth 
but one, appears to erroneous vision distinct in different persons. That One, 
which here is all things, is Achyuta (Vishnu); than whom there is none other. He 
is I; he is thou; he is all: this universe is his form. Abandon the error of 
distinction." 

PARASARA resumed.—The king, being thus instructed, opened his eyes to truth, 
and abandoned the notion of distinct existence: whilst the Brahman, who, 
through the recollection of his former lives, had acquired perfect knowledge, 
obtained now exemption from future birth. Whoever narrates or listens to the 
lessons inculcated in the dialogue between Bharata and the king, has his mind 
enlightened, mistakes not the nature of individuality, and in the course of his 
migrations becomes fitted for ultimate emancipation. 


Footnotes 

01. This legend is a good specimen of a sectarial graft upon a Paurariik stem. 
It is in a great measure peculiar to the Vishnu P., as although it occurs 
also in the Bhagavata, it is narrated there in a much more concise 
manner, and in a strain that looks like an abridgment of our text. 




The Vishnu Purana-Book 3 


01. Chapter 
02. Chapter 
03. Chapter 
04. Chapter 
05. Chapter 
06. Chapter 
07. Chapter 
08. Chapter 
09. Chapter 

10. Chapter 

11. Chapter 

12. Chapter 

13. Chapter 

14. Chapter 

15. Chapter 

16. Chapter 

17. Chapter 

18. Chapter 




01. Chapter 


Account of the several Manus and Manwantaras. Swarochisha the second Manu: 
the divinities, the Indra, the seven Rishis of his period, and his sons. Similar 
details of Auttami, Tamasa, Raivata, Chakshusha, and Vaivaswata. The forms of 
Vishnu, as the preserver, in each Manwantara. The meaning of Vishnu. 

MAITREYA.—The disposition of the earth and of the ocean, and the system of 
the sun and the planets, the creation of the gods and the rest, the origin of the 
Rishis, the generation of the four castes, the production of brute creatures, and 
the narratives of Dhruva and Prahlada, have been fully related by thee, my 
venerable preceptor. I am now desirous to hear from you the series of all the 
Manwantaras, as well as an account of those who preside over the respective 
periods, with Sakra, the king of the gods, at their head. 

PARASARA.—I will repeat to you, Maitreya, in their order, the different 
Manwantaras; those which are past, and those which are to come. 

The first Manu was Swayambhuva, then came Swarochisha, then Auttami, then 
Tamasa, then Raivata, then Chakshusha: these six Manus have passed away. The 
Manu who presides over the seventh Manwantara, which is the present period, is 
Vaivaswata, the son of the sun. 

The period of Swayambhuva Manu, in the beginning of the Kalpa, has already 
been described by me, together with the gods, Rishis, and other personages, who 
then flourished. I will now, therefore, enumerate the presiding gods, Rishis, and 
sons of the Manu, in the Manwantara of Swarochisha. The deities of this period 
(or the second Manwantara) were the classes called Paravatas and Tushitas and 
the king of the gods was the mighty Vipaschit. The seven Rishis were Urja, 
Stambha, Prana, Dattoli, Rishabha, Nischara, and Arvarivat; and Chaitra, 
Kimpurusha, and others, were the Manu's sons. 

In the third period, or Manwantara of Auttami, Susanti was the Indra, the king of 
the gods; the orders of whom were the Sudhamas, Satyas, Sivas, Pradarsanas, 
and Vasavertis each of the five orders consisting of twelve divinities. The seven 


r 

sons of Vasishtha were the seven Rishis and Aja, Parasu, Divya, and others, were 
the sons of the Manu. 

The Surupas, Haris, Satyas, and Sudhis were the classes of gods, each 
comprising twenty-seven, in the period of Tamasa, the fourth Manu. Sivi was the 
Indra, also designated by his performance of a hundred sacrifices (or named 
Satakratu). The seven Rishis were Jyotirdhama, Prithu, Kavya, Chaitra, Agni, 
Vanaka, and Pivara. The sons of Tamasa were the mighty kings Nara, Khyati, 
Santahaya, Janujangha, and others. 

In the fifth interval the Manu was Raivata the Indra was Vibhu: the classes of 
gods, consisting of fourteen each, were the Amitabhas, Abhutarajasas, 
Vaikunthas, and Sumedhasas the seven Rishis were Hiranyaroma, Vedasri, 
Urddhabahu, Vedabahu, Sudhaman, Parjanya, and Mahamuni the sons of 
Raivata were Balabandhu, Susambhavya, Satyaka, and other valiant kings. 

These four Manus, Swarochisha, Auttami, Tamasa, and Raivata, were all 
descended from Priyavrata, who, in consequence of propitiating Vishnu by his 
devotions, obtained these rulers of the Manwantaras for his posterity. 

Chakshusha was the Manu of the sixth period in which the Indra was Manojava: 
the five classes of gods were the Adyas, Prastutas, Bhavyas, Prithugas, and the 
magnanimous Lekhas, eight of each Sumedhas, Virajas, Havishmat, Uttama, 
Madhu, Abhinaman, and Sahishnu were the seven sages the kings of the earth, 
the sons of Chakshusha, were the powerful Uru, Puru, Satadyumna, and others. 

The Manu of the present period is the wise lord of obsequies, the illustrious 
offspring of the sun: the deities are the Adityas, Vasus, and Rudras; their 

r 

sovereign is Purandara: Vasishtha, Kasyapa, Atri, Jamadagni, Gautama, 
Viswamitra, and Bharadwaja are the seven Rishis: and the nine pious sons of 

r 

Vaivaswata Manu are the kings Ikshwaku, Nabhaga, Dhrishta, Sanyati, 

r 

Narishyanta, Nabhanidishta, Karusha, Prishadhra, and the celebrated Vasumat. 

The unequalled energy of Vishnu combining with the quality of goodness, and 
effecting the preservation of created things, presides over all the Manwantaras in 
the form of a divinity. Of a portion of that divinity Yajna was born in the 
Swayambhuva Manwantara, the will-begotten progeny of Akuti. When the 



Swarochisha Manwantara had arrived, that divine Yajna was born as Ajita, along 
with the Tushita gods, the sons of Tushita. In the third Manwantara, Tushita was 
again born of Satya, as Satya, along with the class of deities so denominated. In 
the next period, Satya became Hari, along with the Haris, the children of Hari. 
The excellent Hari was again born in the Raivata Manwantara, of Sambhuti, as 
Manasa, along with the gods called Abhutarajasas. In the next period, Vishnu 
was born of Vikunthi, as Vaikuntha, along with the deities called Vaikunthas. In 
the present Manwantara, Vishnu was again born as Vamana, the son of Kasyapa 
by Aditi. With three paces he subdued the worlds, and gave them, freed from all 
embarrassment, to Purandara. These are the seven persons by whom, in the 
several Manwantaras, created beings have been protected. Because this whole 
world has been pervaded by the energy of the deity, he is entitled Vishnu, from 
the root Vis, 'to enter' or 'pervade;' for all the gods, the Manus, the seven Rishis, 
the sons of the Manus, the Indras the sovereigns of the gods, all are but the 
impersonated might of Vishnu. 




Footnotes 

01. The gods were said to be the Yamas the Rishis were Marichi, Angiras, 
&c. and the sons were Priyavrata and Uttanapada . The Vayu adds to the 
Yamas, the Ajitas, who share with the former, it observes, sacrificial 
offerings. The Matsya, Padma, Brahma P. and Hari Vansa substitute for 
the sons, the grandsons of Swayambhuva, Agnidhra and the rest. 

02. This Manu, according to the legend of his birth in the Markarideya P., 
was the son of Swarochish, so named from the splendour of his 
appearance when born, and who was the son of the nymph Varuthini by 
the Gandharba Kali. The text, in another place, makes him a son of 
Priyavrata. 

03. The Vayu gives the names of the individuals of these two classes, 
consisting each of twelve. It furnishes also the nomenclature of all the 
classes of divinities, and of the sons of the Manus in each Manwantara. 
According to the same authority, the Tushitas were the sons of Kratu: the 
Bhagavata calls them the sons of Tushita by Vedasiras. The divinities of 
each period are, according to the Vayu, those to whom offerings of the 


Soma juice and the like are presented collectively. 

04. The Vayu describes the Rishis of each Manwantara as the sons, or in 
some cases the descendants in a direct line, of the seven sages, Atri, 
Angiras, Bhrigu, Kasyapa, Pulaha, Pulastya, and Vasishtha; with some 
inconsistency, for Kasyapa, at least, did not appear himself until the 

r r 

seventh, Manwantara. In the present series Urja is the son of Vasishtha, 
Stambha springs from Kasyapa, Prana from Bhrigu, Dattoli is the son of 
Pulastya, Rishabha descends from Angiras, Nischara from Atri, and 
Arvarivat is the son of Pulaha. The Brahma P. and Hari Vansa have a 
rather different list, or Aurva, Stambha, Kasyapa, Prana, Vrihaspati, 
Chyavana, and Dattoli; but the origin of part of this difference is nothing 
more than an imperfect quotation from the Vayu Purana; the two first, 
Aurva and Stambha, being specified as the son of Vasishtha and the 
descendant of Kasyapa, and then the parentage of the rest being omitted: 
to complete the seven, therefore, Kasyapa becomes one of them. Some 
other errors of this nature occur in these two works, and from the same 
cause, a blundering citation of the Vayu, which is named as their 
authority. A curious peculiarity also occurs in these mistakes. They are 
confined to the first eight Manwantaras. The Brahma P. omits all details 
of the last six, and the Hari Vansa inserts them fully and correctly, 
agreeably to the authority of the Vayu. It looks, therefore, as if the 
compiler of the Hari Vansa had followed the Brahma, as far as it went, 
right or wrong; but had had recourse to the original Vayu P. when the 
Brahma failed him. Dattoli is sometimes written Dattoni and Dattotri; 
and the latter appears to have been the case with the copy of the Hari 
Vansa employed by M. Langlois, who makes one of the Rishis of this 
Manwantara, "le penitent Atri." He is not without countenance in some 
such reading, for the Padma P. changes the name to Dattatreya, no doubt 
suggested by Datta-atri. Dattatreya, however, is the son of Atri; whilst the 
Vayu calls the person of the text the son of Pulastya. There can be no 
doubt therefore of the correct reading, for the son of Pulastya is Dattoli. 

05. The Vayu agrees with the text in these names, adding seven others. The 
Bhagavata has a different series. The Padma has four other names, 
Nabha, Nabhasya, Prasriti, Bhavana. The Brahma has ten names, 
including two of these, and several of the names of the Rishis of the tenth 
Manwantara. The Matsya has the four names of the Padma for the sons 
of the Manu, and gives seven others, Havindhra, Sukrita, Murtti, Apas, 


Jyotir, Aya, Smrita (the names of the Brahma), as the seven Prajapatis of 
this period, and sons of Vasishtha. The sons of Vasishtha, however, 
belong to the third Manwantara, and bear different appellations. There is, 
no doubt, some blundering here in all the books except the Vayu, and 
those which agree with it. 

06. The name occurs Auttami, Auttama, and Uttama. The Bhagavata and 
Vayu agree with our text in making him a descendant from Priyavrata. 
The Markandeya calls him the son of Uttama, the son of Uttanapada: and 
this appears to be the correct genealogy, both from our text and the 
Bhagavata. 

07. The Brahma and Hari Vansa have, in place of these, the Bhanus; but the 
Vayu and Markandeya concur with the text. 

08. All the authorities agree in this; but the Brahma and Hari Vansa appear to 
furnish a different series also; or even a third, according to the French 
translation: 'Dans le troisieme Manwantara parurent comme Saptarchis 
les fils de Vasichtha, de son nom appeles Vasichthas, les fils de 
Hiranyagarbha et les illustres enfans d’Ourdja.' The text is, ### &c. The 
meaning of which is, 'There were (in the first Manwantara) seven 
celebrated sons of Vasishtha, who (in the third Manwantara) were sons of 
Brahma (i. e. Rishis), the illustrious posterity of Urjja. We have already 

r 

seen that Urjja was the wife of Vasishtha, by whom she had seven sons, 
Rajas,' &c. in the Swayambhuva Manwantara; and these were born again 
as the Rishis of the third period. The names of these persons, according 
to the Matsya and Padma, are however very different from those of the 

r r 

sons of Vasishtha, given, or Kaukundihi, Kurundi, Dalaya, Sankha, 
Pravahita, Mita, and Sammita. 

09. The Vayu adds ten other names to those of the text. The Brahma gives 
ten altogether different. The Bhagavata an Padma have each a separate 
nomenclature. 

10. Of these, the Brahma and Hari V notice only the Satyas: the Matsya and 
Padma have only Sadhyas. The Vayu Bhagavata, Kurma, and 
Markandeya agree with the text. 

11. He is the son of Priyavrata, according to the text, the Vayu, &c. The 
Markandeya has a legend of his birth by a doe; and from his being 
begotten in dark, tempestuous weather, he derives his name. 

12. Severally, according to the Vayu, the progeny of Bhrigu, Kasyapa, 
Angiras, Pulastya, Atri, Vasishtha, and Pulaha. There is considerable 



variety in some of the names. Thus the Matsya has Kavi, Prithu, Agni, 
Salpa, Dhimat, Kapi, Akapi. The Hari Vansa has Kavya, Prithu, Agni, 
Jahnu, Dhatri, Kapivat, Akapivat. For the two last the Vayu reads Gatra 
and Vanapitha. The son of Pulaha is in his place, Arvarivat or 
Vanakapivat. Gatra is amongst the sons of Vasishtha. The Vayu is 
therefore probably most correct, although our text, in regard to these two 
denominations, admits of no doubt. 

13. The Vayu, &c. agree with the text; the Vayu naming eleven. The 
Brahma, Matsya, and Padma have a series of ten names, Sutapas, 
Tapomula, &c.; of which, seven are the Rishis of the twelfth 
Manwantara. 

14. Raivata, as well as his three predecessors, is regarded usually as a 
descendant of Priyavrata. The Markandeya has a long legend of his birth, 
as the son of king Durgama by the nymph Revati, sprung from the 
constellation Revati, whom Ritavach, a Muni, caused to fall from heaven. 
Her radiance became a lake on mount Kumuda, thence called Raivataka; 
and from it appeared the damsel, who was brought up by Pramucha 
Muni. Upon the marriage of Revati, the Muni, at her request, restored the 
asterism to its place in the skies. 

15. The Brahma inserts of these only the Abhutarajasas, with the remark, that 
'they were of like nature (with their name):' i. e. they were exempt from 
the quality of passion. M. Langlois, in rendering the parallel passage of 
the Hari Vansa, has confounded the epithet and the subject: 'dont les 
dieux furent les Pracritis, depourvu de colere et de passion.' He is also at 
a loss what to do with the terms Pariplava and Raibhya, in the following 
passage; ### asking, 'qu’est ce que Pariplava? qu’est ce que Rebhya?' If 
he had had the commentary at hand, these questions would have been 
unnecessary: they are there said to be two classes of divinities. 

16. There is less variety in these names than usual. Vedabahu is read 
Devabahu; Sudhaman, Satyanetra; and Mahamuni, Muni, Yajur, 

r 

Vasishtha, and Yadudhra. According to the Vayu, those of the text are 
respectively of the lineage of Angiras, Bhrigu, Vasishtha, Pulastya, Atri, 
Pulaha, and Kasyapa. There is considerable variety in the names of the 
Manu's sons. 

17. Chakshusha, according to the best authorities, descended from Dhruva 
but the Markandeya has a legend of his birth as the son of a Kshatriya, 
named Anamitra; of his being exchanged at his birth for the son of 



Visranta Raja, and being brought up by the prince as his own; of his 
revealing the business when a man, and propitiating Brahma by his 
devotions; in consequence of which he became a Manu. In his former 
birth he was born from the eye of Brahma; whence his name, from 
Chakshush, 'the eye.' 

18. The authorities agree as to the number, but differ as to the names; reading 
for Adyas, Aryas and Apyas; for Prastutas, Prabhutas and Prasutas; for 
Prithugas, Prithukas and Prithusas; and, which is a more wide deviation, 
Ribhus for Bhavyas. M. Langlois omits the Prasutas, and inserts 
Divaukasas; but the latter, meaning 'divinities,' is only an epithet. The 
Hari Vansa has, ###—. The comment adds, ###. 

19. The Vayu reads Sudhaman for the first name; Unnata for Uttama; and 
Abhimana for Abhinaman. The latter occurs also Abhinamin (Matsya) 
and Atinaman (Hari V.) The latter reads, no doubt incorrectly, Bhrigu, 
Nabha, and Vivas wat for Uttama, Madhu, and Havishmat. The sons of 
Chakshusha are enumerated. 

20. There is no great variety of nomenclature in this Manwantara. The Vayu 
adds to the deities the Sadhyas, Vis was, Maruts, and gods sprung from 
Bhrigu and Angiras. The Bhagavata adds the Ribhus: and most include 
the two Aswins as a class. Of the Maruts, however, the Hari Vansa 
remarks that they are born in every Manwantara, seven times seven (or 
forty-nine); that in each Manwantara four times seven, or twenty-eight, 
obtain emancipation, but their places are filled up by persons reborn in 
that character. So the commentator explains the passages ### and ### 
&c. ### Comment. ### Comment. It may be suspected, however, that 
these passages have been derived from the simple statement of the 
Matsya, that in all the Manwantaras classes of Rishis appear by seven 
and seven, and having established a code of law and morality, depart to 
felicity. The Vayu has a rather different list of the seven Rishis; or 
Vasumat, the son of Vasishtha; Vatsara, descended from Kasyapa; 
Viswamitra, the son of Gadhi, and of the Kusika race; Jamadagni, son of 
Kuru, of the race of Bhrigu; Bharadwaja, son of Vrihaspati; Saradwat, 
son of Gautama, of the family of Utatthya; and Brahmakosha or Atri, 
descended from Brahma. All the other authorities agree with our text. 

21. The nominal father being the patriarch Ruchi. 

22. There is no further account of this incarnation in the Vishnu Puraria. 
Fuller details occur in the Bhagavata, Kurma, Matsya, and Vamana 







Purarias. The first of these (b. VIII. c. 15-23) relates the penance and 
sacrifices of Bali, son of Virochana, by which he had overcome Indra and 
the gods, and obtained supreme dominion over the three spheres. Vishnu, 
at the request of the deities, was born as a dwarf, Vamana, the son of 
Aditi by Kasyapa; who, applying to Bali for alms, was promised by the 
prince whatever he might demand, notwithstanding Sukra, the preceptor 
of the Daityas, apprised him whom he had to deal with. The dwarf 
demanded as much space as he could step over at three steps; and upon 
the assent of Bali, enlarged himself to such dimensions as to stride over 
the three worlds. Being worshipped however by Bali and his ancestor 
Prahlada, he conceded to them the sovereignty of Patala. 

23. See the same etymology. 




02. Chapter 


Of the seven future Manus and Manwantaras. Story of Sanjna and Chhaya, 
wives of the sun. Savarni, son of Chhaya, the eighth Manu. His successors, with 
the divinities, &c. of their respective periods. Appearance of Vishnu in each of 
the four Yugas. 

MAITREYA.—You have recapitulated to me, most excellent Brahman, the 
particulars of the past Manwantaras; now give me some account of those which 
are to come. 

PARASARA.—Sanjna, the daughter of Viswakarman, was the wife of the sun, 
and bore him three children, the Manu (Vaivaswata), Yama, and the goddess 
Yami (or the Yamuna river). Unable to endure the fervours of her lord, Sanjna 
gave him Chhaya as his handmaid, and repaired to the forests to practise devout 
exercises. The sun, supposing Chhaya to be his wife Sanjna, begot by her three 
other children, Sanaischara (Saturn), another Manu (Savarni), and a daughter 
Tapati (the Tapti river). Chhaya, upon one occasion, being offended with Yama, 
the son of Sanjna, denounced an imprecation upon him, and thereby revealed to 
Yama and to the sun that she was not in truth Sanjna, the mother of the former. 
Being further informed by Chhaya that his wife had gone to the wilderness, the 
sun beheld her by the eye of meditation engaged in austerities, in the figure of a 
mare (in the region of Uttara Kuru). Metamorphosing himself into a horse, he 
rejoined his wife, and begot three other children, the two Aswins and Revanta, 
and then brought Sanjna back to his own dwelling. To diminish his intensity, 
Viswakarman placed the luminary on his lathe, to grind off some of his 
effulgence; and in this manner reduced it an eighth, for more than that was 
inseparable. The parts of the divine Vaishnava splendour, residing in the sun, that 
were filed off by Viswakarman, fell blazing down upon the earth, and the artist 
constructed of them the discus of Vishnu, the trident of Siva, the weapon of the 
god of wealth, the lance of Kartikeya, and the weapons of the other gods: all 
these Viswakarman fabricated from the superfluous rays of the sun. 

The son of Chhaya, who was called also a Manu, was denominated Savarni, 
from being of the same caste (Savarna) as his elder brother, the Manu 


Vaivaswata. He presides over the ensuing or eighth Manwantara; the particulars 
of which, and the following, I will now relate. In the period in which Savarni 
shall be the Manu, the classes of the gods will be Sutapas, Amitabhas, and 
Mukhyas; twenty-one of each. The seven Rishis will be Diptimat, Galava, Rama, 
Kripa, Drauni; my son Vyasa will be the sixth, and the seventh will be 
Rishyasringa. The Indra will be Bali, the sinless son of Virochana, who through 
the favour of Vishnu is actually sovereign of part of Patala. The royal progeny of 
Savarni will be Virajas, Arvarivas, Nirmoha, and others. 

The ninth Manu will be Daksha-savarni. The Paras, Marichigarbhas, and 
Sudharmas will be the three classes of divinities, each consisting of twelve; their 
powerful chief will be the Indra Adbhuta. Savana, Dyutimat, Bhavya, Vasu, 
Medhatithi, Jyotishman, and Satya will be the seven Rishis. Dhritaketu, 
Driptiketu, Panchahasta, Mahamaya, Prithusrava, and others, will be the sons of 
the Manu. 

In the tenth Manwantara the Manu will be Brahma-savarni: the gods will be the 
Sudhamas, Viruddhas, and Satasankhyas: the Indra will be the mighty Santi: the 
Rishis will be Havishman, Sukriti, Satya, Apammurtti, Nabhaga, Apratimaujas, 
and Satyaketu: and the ten sons of the Manu will be Sukshetra, Uttarnaujas, 
Harishena, and others. 

In the eleventh Manwantara the Manu will be Dharma-savarni: the principal 
classes of gods will be the Vihangamas, Kamagamas, and Nirmanaratis, each 
thirty in number of whom Vrisha will be the Indra: the Rishis will be Nischara, 
Agnitejas, Vapushman, Vishnu, Aruni, Havishman, and Anagha: the kings of the 
earth, and sons of the Manu, will be Savarga, Sarvadharma, Devanika, and 
others. 

In the twelfth Manwantara the son of Rudra, Savarni, will be the Manu: 
Ritudhama will be the Indra: and the Haritas, Lohitas, Sumanasas, and Sukarmas 
will be the classes of gods, each comprising fifteen. Tapaswi, Sutapas, 
Tapomurtti, Taporati, Tapodhriti, Tapodyuti, and Tapodhana will be the Rishis: 

r 

and Devavan, Upadeva, Devasreshta, and others, will be the Manu's sons, and 
mighty monarchs on the earth. 


In the thirteenth Manwantara the Manu will be Rauchya the classes of gods, 



thirty-three in each, will be the Sudhamans, Sudharmans, and Sukarmans; their 
Indra will be Divaspati: the Rishis will be Nirmoha, Tatwadersin, Nishprakampa, 
Nirutsuka, Dhritimat, Avyaya, and Sutapas: and Chitrasena, Vichitra, and others, 
will be the kings. 

In the fourteenth Manwantara, Bhautya will be the Manu Suchi, the Indra: the 

r 

five classes of gods will be the Chakshushas, the Pavitras, Kanishthas, Bhrajiras, 
and Vavriddhas: the seven Rishis will be Agnibahu, Suchi, Sukra, Magadha, 
Gridhra, Yukta, and Ajita: and the sons of the Manu will be Uru, Gabhira, 
Bradhna, and others, who will be kings, and will rule over the earth. 

At the end of every four ages there is a disappearance of the Vedas, and it is the 
province of the seven Rishis to come down upon earth from heaven to give them 
currency again. In every Krita age the Manu (of the period) is the legislator or 
author of the body of law, the Smriti: the deities of the different classes receive 
the sacrifices during the Manwantaras to which they severally belong: and the 
sons of the Manu them, selves, and their descendants, are the sovereigns of the 
earth for the whole of the same term. The Manu, the seven Rishis, the gods, the 
sons of the Manu, who are the kings, and Indra, are the beings who preside over 
the world during each Manwantara. 

An entire Kalpa, oh Brahman, is said to comprise a thousand ages, or fourteen 
Manwantaras and it is succeeded by a night of similar duration; during which, he 
who wears the form of Brahma, Janarddana, the substance of all things, the lord 
of all, and creator of all, involved in his own illusions, and having swallowed up 
the three spheres, sleeps upon the serpent Sesha, amidst the ocean. Being after 
that awake, he, who is the universal soul, again creates all things as they were 
before, in combination with the property of foulness (or activity): and in a 
portion of his essence, associated with the property of goodness, he, as the 
Manus, the kings, the gods, and their Indras, as well as the seven Rishis, is the 
preserver of the world. In what manner Vishnu, who is characterised by the 
attribute of providence during the four ages, effected their preservation, I will 
next, Maitreya, explain. 

In the Krita age, Vishnu, in the form of Kapila and other inspired teachers, 
assiduous for the benefit of all creatures, imparts to them true wisdom. In the 
Treta age he restrains the wicked, in the form of a universal monarch, and 



protects the three worlds. In the Dwapara age, in the person of Veda-vyasa, he 
divides the one Veda into four, and distributes it into innumerable branches: and 
at the end of the Kali or fourth age he appears as Kalki, and reestablishes the 
iniquitous in the paths of rectitude. In this manner the universal spirit preserves, 
creates, and at last destroys, all the world. 

Thus, Brahman, I have described to you the true nature of that great being who is 
all things, and besides whom there is no other existent thing, nor has there been, 
nor will there be, either here or elsewhere. I have also enumerated to you the 
Manwantaras, and those who preside over them. What else do you wish to hear? 


Footnotes 

01. That is, her shadow or image. It also means 'shade.' The Bhagavata, 
however, makes both Sanjna and Chhaya daughters of Viswakarman. 
According to the Matsya, Vivaswat, the son of Kasyapa and Aditi, had 
three wives, Rajni, the daughter of Raivata, by whom he had Revanta; 
Prabha, by whom he had Prabhata; and by Sanjna, the daughter of 
Twashtri, the Manu and Yama and Yamuna. The story then proceeds 
much as in the text. 

02. Yama, provoked at her partiality for her own children, abused Chhaya, 
and lifted up his foot to kick her. She cursed him to have his leg affected 
with sores and worms; but his father bestowed upon him a cock, to eat 
the worms, and remove the discharge; and Yama, afterwards propitiating 
Mahadeva, obtained the rank of Lokapala, and sovereign of Tartarus. 

03. The Matsya says he trimmed the sun every where except in the feet, the 
extent of which he could not discern. Consequently in pictures or images 
the feet of the sun must never be delineated, under pain of leprosy, &c. 

04. The term is Sivika, which properly means 'a litter,' The commentator 
calls it Astra, 'a weapon.' 

05. This legend is told, with some variations of no great importance, in the 
Matsya, Markandeya, and Padma P. (Swarga Khanda), in the Bhagavata, 
and Hari Vansa, &c. 

06. The Markandeya, whilst it admits Savarni to be the son of the sun, has a 


legend of his former birth, in the Swarochisha Manwantara, as Suratha 
Raja, who became a Manu by having then propitiated Devi. It was to him 
that the Durga Mahatmya or Charidi, the popular narrative of Durga's 
triumphs over various demons, was narrated. 

07. The Vayu has Jamadagnya or Parasurama, of the Kusika race; Galava, of 
that of Bhrigu; Dwaipayana (or Vyasa), of the family of Vasishtha; Kripa, 
the son of Saradwat; Diptimat, descended from Atri; Rishyasringa, from 
Kasyapa; and Aswatthaman, the son of Droria, of the Bharadwaja family. 
The Matsya and Padma have Satananda in place of Diptimat. 

08. The four following Savarnis are described in the Vayu as the mind- 
engendered sons of a daughter of Daksha, named either Suvrata (Vayu) 
or Priya (Brahma) by himself and the three gods, Brahma, Dharma, and 
Rudra, to whom he presented her on mount Meru; whence they are called 
also Meru-savarriis. They are termed Savarnis from their being of one 
family or caste. According to the same authority, followed by the Hari 
Vansa, it appears that this Manu is also called Rohita. Most of the details 
of this and the following Manwantaras are omitted in the Matsya, 
Brahma, Padma, and Markandeya Puranas. The Bhagavata and Kurma 
give the same as our text; and the Vayu, which agrees very nearly with it, 
is followed in most respects by the Hari Vansa. The Matsya and Padma 
are peculiar in their series and nomenclature of the Manus themselves, 
calling the 9th Rauchya, 10th Bhautya, 11th Merusavarrii, son of 
Brahma, 12th Ritu, 13th Ritadhaman, and 14th Viswaksena. The 
Bhagavata calls the two last Manus, Deva-savarrii and Indra-savarrii. 

09. Hence the Vayu identifies the first with days, the second with nights, and 
the third with hours. 

10. The son of the Prajapati Ruchi (Vayu, &c.), by the nymph Manini, the 
daughter of the Apsaras Pramlocha (Markandeya). 

11. Son of Ravi, by the goddess Bhuti, according to the Vayu; but the 
Markandeya makes Bhuti the son of Angiras, whose pupil Santi, having 
suffered the holy fire to go out in his master's absence, prayed to Agni, 
and so propitiated him, that he not only relighted the flame, but desired 
Santi to demand a further boon. Santi accordingly solicited a son for his 
Guru; which son was Bhuti, the father of the Manu Bhautya. 

12. Although the Puranas which give an account of the Manwantaras agree 
in some of the principal details, yet in the minor ones they offer many 
varieties, some of which have been noticed. These chiefly regard the first 


six and the eighth. Except in a few individual peculiarities, the authorities 
seem to arrange themselves in two classes; one comprehending the 
Vishnu, Vayu, Kurma, Bhagavata, and Markandeya; and the other the 
Matsya, Padma, Brahma, and Hari Vansa. The Markandeya, although it 
agrees precisely with the Vishnu in its nomenclature, differs from it, and 
from all, in devoting a considerable number of its pages to legends of the 
origin of the Manus, all of which are evidently of comparatively recent 
invention, and several of which have been no doubt suggested by the 
etymology of the names of the Manus. 

13. A thousand ages of the gods and fourteen Manwantaras are not precisely 
the same thing, as has been already explained. 

14. The order of the text would imply, that as Brahma he sleeps upon Sesha; 
but if this be intended, it is at variance with the usual legend, that it is as 
Vishnu or Narayana that the deity sleeps in the intervals of dissolution. 
The commentator accordingly qualifies the phrase Brahmarupadhara by 
the term Diva: 'Vishnu wears the form of Brahma by day; by night he 
sleeps on Sesha, in the person of Narayana.' This however may be 
suspected to be an innovation upon an older system; for in speaking of 
the alternations of creation and dissolution, they are always considered as 
consentaneous with the day and night of Brahma alone. 

15. As a Chakravarttin. 




03. Chapter 


Division of the Veda into four portions, by a Vyasa, in every Dwapara age. List 
of the twenty-eight Vyasas of the present Manwantara. Meaning of the word 
Brahma. 

MAITREYA.—I have learnt from you, in due order, how this world is Vishnu; 
how it is in Vishnu; how it is from Vishnu: nothing further is to be known: but I 
should desire to hear how the Vedas were divided, in different ages, by that great 
being, in the form of Veda-vyasa? who were the Vyasas of their respective eras? 
and what were the branches into which the Vedas were distributed? 

PARASARA.—The branches of the great tree of the Vedas are so numerous, 
Maitreya, that it is impossible to describe them at length. I will give you a 
summary account of them. 

In every Dwapara (or third) age, Vishnu, in the person of Vyasa, in order to 
promote the good of mankind, divides the Veda, which is properly but one, into 
many portions: observing the limited perseverance, energy, and application of 
mortals, he makes the Veda fourfold, to adapt it to their capacities; and the 
bodily form which he assumes, in order to effect that classification, is known by 
the name of Veda-vyasa. Of the different Vyasas in the present Manwantara, and 
the branches which they have taught, you shall have an account. 

Twenty-eight times have the Vedas been arranged by the great Rishis in the 
Vaivaswata Manwantara in the Dwapara age, and consequently eight and twenty 
Vyasas have passed away; by whom, in their respective periods, the Veda has 
been divided into four. In the first Dwapara age the distribution was made by 
Swayambhu (Brahma) himself; in the second, the arranger of the Veda (Veda- 
vyasa) was Prajapati (or Manu); in the third, Usanas; in the fourth, Vrihaspati; in 
the fifth, Savitri; in the sixth, Mrityu (Death, or Yama); in the seventh, Indra; in 
the eighth, Vasishtha; in the ninth, Saraswata; in the tenth, Tridhaman; in the 
eleventh, Trivrishan; in the twelfth, Bharadwaja; in the thirteenth, Antariksha; in 
the fourteenth, Vapra; in the fifteenth, Trayyaruna in the sixteenth, Dhananjaya; 
in the seventeenth, Kritanjaya; in the eighteenth, Rina; in the nineteenth, 


Bharadwaja; in the twentieth, Gotama; in the twenty-first, Uttama, also called 
Haryatma; in the twenty-second, Vena, who is likewise named Rajasravas; in the 
twenty-third, Somasushmapana, also Trinavindu; in the twenty-fourth, Riksha, 
the descendant of Bhrigu, who is known also by the name Valmiki; in the 
twenty-fifth, my father Sakti was the Vyasa; I was the Vyasa of the twenty-sixth 
Dwapara, and was succeeded by Jaratkaru; the Vyasa of the twenty-eighth, who 
followed him, was Krishna Dwaipayana. These are the twenty-eight elder 
Vyasas, by whom, in the preceding Dwapara ages, the Veda has been divided 
into four. In the next Dwapara, Drauni (the son of Drona) will be the Vyasa, 
when my son, the Muni Krishna Dwaipayana, who is the actual Vyasa, shall 
cease to be (in that character). 

The syllable Om is defined to be the eternal monosyllabic Brahma. The word 
Brahma is derived from the root Vriha (to increase), because it is infinite (spirit), 
and because it is the cause by which the Vedas (and all things) are developed. 
Glory to Brahma, who is addressed by that mystic word, associated eternally 
with the triple universe 5, and who is one with the four Vedas. Glory to Brahma, 
who, alike in the destruction and renovation of the world, is called the great and 
mysterious cause of the intellectual principle (Mahat); who is without limit in 
time or space, and exempt from diminution or decay; in whom (as connected 
with the property of darkness) originates worldly illusion; and in whom resides 
the end of soul (fruition or liberation), through the properties of light and of 
activity (or goodness and foulness). He is the refuge of those who are versed in 
the Sankhya philosophy; of those who have acquired control over their thoughts 
and passions. He is the invisible, imperishable Brahma; varying in form, 
invariable in substance; the chief principle, self-engendered; who is said to 
illuminate the caverns of the heart; who is indivisible, radiant, undecaying, 
multiform. To that supreme Brahma be for ever adoration. 

That form of Vasudeva, who is the same with supreme spirit, which is Brahma, 
and which, although diversified as threefold, is identical, is the lord, who is 
conceived by those that contemplate variety in creation to be distinct in all 
creatures. He, composed of the Rik, Sauna, and Yajur-Vedas, is at the same time 
their essence, as he is the soul of all embodied spirits. He, distinguished as 
consisting of the Vedas, creates the Vedas, and divides them by many 
subdivisions into branches: he is the author of those branches: he is those 
aggregated branches; for he, the eternal lord, is the essence of true knowledge. 





Footnotes 

01. The text has, 'Hear from me an account of the Vyasas of the different 
Manwantaras;' but this is inconsistent with what follows, in which the 
enumeration is confined to the Vaivaswata Manwantara. 

02. This name occurs as that of one of the kings of the solar dynasty, and is 
included by Mr. Colebrooke amongst the persons of royal descent, who 
are mentioned as authors of hymns in the Rig-veda. As. Res. VIII. 383. 

03. A similar list of Vyasas is given in the Kurma and Vayu Purarias. Many 
of the individuals appear as authors of different hymns and prayers in the 
Vedas; and it is very possible that the greater portion, if not all of them, 
had a real existence, being the framers or teachers of the religion of the 
Hindus before a complete ritual was compiled. 

04. We have already had occasion to explain the sanctity of this 
monosyllable, which ordinarily commences different portions of the 
Vedas, and which, as the text describes it, is identified with the supreme, 
undefinable deity, or Brahma. So in the Bhagavad-gita: 'Repeating Om, 
the monosyllable, which is Brahma, and calling me to mind:' which is not 
exactly the same idea that is conveyed by Schlegel's version; 
'Monosyllabum mysticum Om pronuntiando, numen adorans, mei 
memor;' where 'numen adorans,' although it may be defended as 
necessary to the sense, is not expressed by the words of the text, nor 
compatible with Hindu notions. In one of the MSS. employed, the 
transcriber has evidently been afraid of desecrating this sacred 
monosyllable, and has therefore altered the text, writing it ### instead of 
###. 

05. The daily prayers of the Brahman commence with the formula, Om bhuh, 
bhuvah, swar: Om earth, sky, heaven: these are the three mystical terms 
called Vyahritis, and are scarcely of less sanctity than the Prariava itself. 
Their efficacy, and the order of their repetition preceding the Gayatri, are 
fully detailed in Manu, II. 76-81. In the Mitakshara they are directed to 
be twice repeated mentally, with Om prefixed to each; Om bhuh, Om 
bhuvah, Om swar; the breath being suppressed by closing the lips and 
nostrils. 


06. The form or sensible type of Vasudeva is here considered to be the 
monosyllable Om, and which is one with the three mystical words, Bhuh, 
Bhuvar, Swar, and with the Vedas: consequently the Vyahritis and the 
Vedas are also forms of Vasudeva, diversified as to their typical 
character, but essentially one and the same. 




04. Chapter 


Division of the Veda, in the last Dwapara age, by the Vyasa Krishna 
Dwaipayana. Paila made reader of the Rich; Vaisampayana of the Yajush; 
Jaimini of the Shun; and Sumantu of the Atharvan. Suta appointed to teach the 
historical poems. Origin of the four parts of the Veda. Sanhitas of the Rig-veda. 

PARASARA.—The original Veda, in four parts, consisted of one hundred 
thousand stanzas; and from it sacrifice of ten kinds, the accomplisher of all 
desires, proceeded. In the twenty-eighth Dwapara age my son Vyasa separated 
the four portions of the Veda into four Vedas. In the same manner as the Vedas 
were arranged by him, as Vedavyasa, so were they divided in former periods by 
all the preceding Vyasas, and by myself: and the branches into which they were 
subdivided by him were the same into which they had been distributed in every 
aggregate of the four ages. Know, Maitreya, the Vyasa called Krishna 
Dwaipayana to be the deity Narayana; for who else on this earth could have 
composed the Mahabharata? Into what portions the Vedas were arranged by my 
magnanimous son, in the Dwapara age, you shall hear. 

When Vyasa was enjoined by Brahma to arrange the Vedas in different books, he 
took four persons, well read in those works, as his disciples. He appointed Paila 
reader of the Rich Vaisampayana of the Yajush; and Jaimini of the Soma-veda: 
and Sumantu, who was conversant with the Atharva-veda, was also the disciple 
of the learned Vyasa. He also took Suta, who was named Lomaharshana, as his 
pupil in historical and legendary traditions. 

There was but one Yajur-veda; but dividing this into four parts, Vyasa instituted 
the sacrificial rite that is administered by four kinds of priests: in which it was 
the duty of the Adhwaryu to recite the prayers (Yajush) (or direct the ceremony); 
of the Hotri, to repeat the hymns (Richas); of the Udgatri, to chaunt other hymns 
(Sama); and of the Brahman, to pronounce the formulae called Atharva. Then the 
Muni, having collected together the hymns called Richas, compiled the Rigveda; 
with the prayers and directions termed Yajushas he formed the Yajur-veda; with 
those called Sama, Sama-veda; and with the Atharvas he composed the rules of 
all the ceremonies suited to kings, and the function of the Brahman agreeably to 


practice. 


This vast original tree of the Vedas, having been divided by him into four 
principal stems, soon branched out into an extensive forest. In the first place, 
Paila divided the Rig-veda, and gave the two Sanhitas (or collections of hymns) 
to Indrapramati and to Bashkali. Bashkali subdivided his Sanhita into four, 
which he gave to his disciples Baudhya, Agnimathara, Yajnawalka, and Parasara; 
and they taught these secondary shoots from the primitive branch. Indrapramati 
imparted his Sanhita to his son Maridukeya, and it thence descended through 
successive generations, as well as disciples. Vedamitra, called also Sakalya, 
studied the same Sanhita, but he divided it into five Sanhitas, which he 
distributed amongst as many disciples, named severally Mudgala, Goswalu, 
Vatsya, Saliya, and Sisira. Sakapurrii made a different division of the original 
Sanhita into three portions, and added a glossary (Nirukta), constituting a fourth. 
The three Sanhitas were given to his three pupils, Krauncha, Vaitalaki, and 
Valaka; and a fourth, (thence named) Niruktakrit, had the glossary. In this way 
branch sprang from branch. Another Bashkali composed three other Sanhitas, 
which he taught to his disciples Kalayani, Gargya, and Kathajava. These are they 
by whom the principal divisions of the Rich have been promulgated. 


Footnotes 

01. According to the Grihya portion of the Sama-veda, there are five great 
sacrificial ceremonies; 1. Agnihotra, burnt-offerings, or libations of 
clarified butter on sacred fire; 2. Dersapaurriamasa, sacrifices at new and 
full moon; 3. Chaturmasya, sacrifices every four months; 4. Pasu-yajna 
or Aswamedha, sacrifice of a horse or animal; and 5. Soma-yajna, 
offerings and libations of the juice of the acid asclepias. These, again, are 
either Prakrita, 'simple,' or Vaikrita, 'modified;' and being thus doubled, 
constitute ten. 

02. The composition of the Mahabharata is always ascribed to the Vyasa 
named Krishna Dwaipayana, the cotemporary of the events there 
described. The allusion in the text establishes the priority of the poem to 
the Vishnu Puraria. 


03. Or rather, 'he took Paila as teacher.' The expression is, Rigveda sravakam 
Pailam jagraha. Sravaka means properly 'he who causes to hear,' 'a 
lecturer,' 'a preacher;' although, as in the case of its applicability to the 
laity of the Buddhists and Jainas, it denotes a disciple. The commentator 
however observes, that the text is sometimes read 'one who had gone 
through the Rig-veda.' So in the preceding verse it is said, 'he took four 
persons, well read in the Vedas, as his disciples,' and again it is said, 
'Sumantu, conversant with the Atharva-veda, was his disciple.' It is clear, 
therefore, that the Vedas were known, as distinct works, before Krishna 
Dwaipayana; and it is difficult to understand how he earned his title of 
arranger, or Vyasa: at any rate, in undertaking to give order to the prayers 
and hymns of which the Vedas consist, Paila and the others were rather 
his coadjutors than disciples; and it seems probable that the tradition 
records the first establishment of a school, of which the Vyasa was the 
head, and the other persons named were the teachers. 

04. The Itihasa and Puranas; understanding by the former, legendary and 
traditional narratives. It is usually supposed that by the Itihasa the 
Mahabharata is especially meant; but although this poem is ascribed to 
Krishna Dwaipayana, the recitation of it is not attributed to his pupil, 
Roma or Loma-harshana: it was first narrated by Vaisampayana, and 
after him by Sauti, the son of Lomaharshana. 

05. From this account, which is repeated in the Vayu P., it appears that the 
original Veda was the Yajush, or in other words was a miscellaneous 
body of precepts, formulae, prayers, and hymns, for sacrificial 
ceremonies; Yajush being derived by the grammarians from Yaj, 'to 
worship.' The derivation of the Vayu Purana, however, is from Yuj, 'to 
join,' 'to employ;' the formulae being those especially applied to sacrificial 
rites, or set apart for that purpose from the general collection: ### again, 
### The commentator on the text however, citing the former of these 
passages from the Vayu, reads it, confining the derivation to Yaj, 'to 
worship.' The concluding passage, relating to the Atharvan, refers, in 
regard to regal ceremonies, to those of expiation, Santi, &c. The function 
of the Brahman is not explained; but from the preceding specification of 
the four orders of priests who repeat at sacrifices portions of the several 
Vedas, it relates to the office of the one that is termed specifically the 
Brahman: so the Vayu has 'He constituted the function of the Brahman at 
sacrifices with the Atharva-veda.' 



06. Both in our text and in that of the Vayu this name occurs both Bashkala 
and Bashkali. Mr. Colebrooke writes it Bahkala and Bahkali. As. Res. 
VIII. 374. 

07. The Vayu supplies the detail. Mandukeya, or, as one copy writes, 
Markandeya, taught the Sanhita to his son Satyasravas; he to his son 
Satyahita; and he to his son Satyasri. The latter had three pupils, Sakalya, 
also called Devamitra (sic in MS.), Rathantara, and another Bashkali, 
called also Bharadwaja. The Vayu has a legend of Sakalya's death, in 
consequence of his being defeated by Yajnavalkya in a disputation at a 
sacrifice celebrated by Janaka. 

08. These names in the Vayu are Mudgala, Golaka, Khaliya, Matsya, 
Saisireya. 

09. The commentator, who is here followed by Mr. Colebrooke, states that he 
was a pupil of Indrapramati; but from the Vayu it appears that Sakapurni 
was another name of Rathantara, the pupil of Satyasri, the author of three 
Sanhitas and a Nirukta, or glossary; whence Mr. Colebrooke supposes 
him the same with Yaska. As. Res. VIII. 375. It is highly probable that 
the text of the Vayu may be made to correct that of the Vishnu in this 
place, which is inaccurate, notwithstanding the copies agree: they read, 
###. Here Sakapurnir-atha-itaram is the necessary construction; but quere 
if it should not be Sakapurni Rathantara. The parallel passage in the 
Vayu is, ###. Now in describing the pupils of Satyasri, Rathantara was 
named clearly enough: ###. In another passage it would seem to be 
implied that this Bashkali was the author of the Sanhitas, and Rathantara 
of the Nirukta only: ###. However this may be, his being the author of 
the Nirukta identifies him with Sakapurni, and makes it likely that the 
two names should come in juxta-position in our text, as well as in the 
Vayu. It must be admitted, however, that there are some rather 
inexplicable repetitions in the part of the Vayu where this account occurs, 
although two copies agree in the reading. That a portion of the Vedas 
goes by the name of Rathantara we have seen; but as far as is yet known, 
the name is confined to different prayers or hymns of the Uhya Gana of 
the Sama-veda. The text of the Vishnu also admits of a different 
explanation regarding the work of Sakapurni, and instead of a threefold 
division of the original, the passage may mean that he composed a third 
Sanhita. So Mr. Colebrooke says "the Vishnu R omits the Sakhas of 
Aswalayana and Sankhyayana, and intimates that Sakapurni gave the 





third varied edition from that of Indrapramati." The Vayu, however, is 
dear in ascribing three Sanhitas or Sakhas to Sakapurni. 

10. In the Vayu the four pupils of Sakapurni are called Kenava, Dalaki, 
Satavalaka, and Naigama. 

11. This Bashkali may either be, according to the commentator, the pupil of 
Paila, who, in addition to the four Sanhitas previously noticed, compiled 
three others; or he may be another Bashkali, a fellow-pupil of Sakapurni. 
The Vayu makes him a disciple of Satyasri, the fellow-pupil of Sakalya 
and Rathantara, and adds the name or title Bharadwaja. 

12. In the Vayu they are called Nandayaniya, Pannagari, and Arjjava. 

13. Both the Vishnu and Vayu Puranas omit two other principal divisions of 
the Rich, those of Aswalayana and Sankhyayana or the Kausitaki. As. 
Res. VIII. 375. There is no specification of the aggregate number of 
Sanhitas of the Rich in our text, or in the Vayu; but they describe 
eighteen, including the Nirukta; or as Mr. Colebrooke states, sixteen (As. 
Res. VIII. 374); that is, omitting the two portions of the original, as 
divided by Paila. The Kurma Purana states the number at twenty-one; but 
treatises on the study of the Vedas reduce the Sakhas of the Rich to five. 




05. Chapter 


Divisions of the Yajur-veda. Story of Yajnawalkya: forced to give up what he 
has learned: picked up by others, forming the Taittiriya-yajush. Yajnawalkya 
worships the sun, who communicates to him the Vajasneyi-yajush. 

PARASARA.—Of the tree of the Yajur-veda there are twenty-seven branches, 
which Vaisampayana, the pupil of Vyasa, compiled, and taught to as many 
disciples. Amongst these, Yajnawalkya, the son of Brahmarata, was 
distinguished for piety and obedience to his preceptor. 

It had been formerly agreed by the Munis, that any one of them who, at a certain 
time, did not join an assembly held on mount Meru should incur the guilt of 
killing a Brahman, within a period of seven nights. Vaisampayana alone failed to 
keep the appointment, and consequently killed, by an accidental kick with his 
foot, the child of his sister. He then addressed his scholars, and desired them to 
perform the penance expiatory of Brahmanicide on his behalf. Without any 
hesitation Yajnawalkya refused, and said, "How shall I engage in penance with 
these miserable and inefficient Brahmans?" On which his Guru, being incensed, 
commanded him to relinquish all that he had learnt from him. "You speak 
contemptuously," he observed, "of these young Brahmans, but of what use is a 
disciple who disobeys my commands?" "I spoke," replied Yajnawalkya, "in 
perfect faith; but as to what I have read from you, I have had enough: it is no 
more than this--" (acting as if he would eject it from his stomach); when he 
brought up the texts of the Yajush in substance stained with blood. He then 
departed. The other scholars of Vaisampayana, transforming themselves to 
partridges (Tittiri), picked up the texts which he had disgorged, and which from 
that circumstance were called Taittiriya and the disciples were called the 
Charaka professors of the Yajush, from Charana, 'going through' or 'performing' 
the expiatory rites enjoined by their master. 

Yajnawalkya, who was perfect in ascetic practices, addressed himself 
strenuously to the sun, being anxious to recover possession of the texts of the 
Yajush. "Glory to the sun," he exclaimed, "the gate of liberation, the fountain of 
bright radiance, the triple source of splendour, as the Rig, the Yajur, and the 


Sanaa Vedas. Glory to him, who, as fire and the moon, is one with the cause of 
the universe: to the sun, that is charged with radiant heat, and with the Sushumna 
ray (by which the moon is fed with light): to him who is one with the notion of 
time, and all its divisions of hours, minutes, and seconds: to him who is to be 
meditated upon as the visible form of Vishnu, as the impersonation of the mystic 
Om: to him who nourishes the troops of the gods, having filled the moon with 
his rays; who feeds the Pitris with nectar and ambrosia, and who nourishes 
mankind with rain; who pours down or absorbs the waters in the time of the 
rains, of cold, and of heat. Glory be to Brahma, the sun, in the form of the three 
seasons: he who alone is the dispeller of the darkness of this earth, of which he is 
the sovereign lord: to the god who is clad in the raiment of purity be adoration. 
Glory to the sun, until whose rising man is incapable of devout acts, and water 
does not purify, and touched by whose rays the world is fitted for religious rites: 
to him who is the centre and source of purification. Glory to Savitri, to Surya, to 
Bhaskara, to Vivaswat, to Aditya, to the first-born of gods or demons. I adore the 
eye of the universe, borne in a golden car, whose banners scatter ambrosia." 

Thus eulogized by Yajnawalkya, the sun, in the form of a horse, appeared to 
him, and said, "Demand what you desire." To which the sage, having prostrated 
himself before the lord of day, replied, "Give me a knowledge of those texts of 
the Yajush with which even my preceptor is unacquainted." Accordingly the sun 
imparted to him the texts of the Yajush called Ayatayama (unstudied), which 
were unknown to Vaisampayana: and because these were revealed by the sun in 
the form of a horse, the Brahmans who study this portion of the Yajush are called 
Vajis (horses). Fifteen branches of this school sprang from Kanwa and other 
pupils of Yajnawalkya. 




Footnotes 

01. The Vayu divides these into three classes, containing each nine, and 
discriminated, northern, middle, and eastern. Of these, the chiefs were 
severally Syamayani, Arurii, and Analavi, or Alambi. With some 
inconsistency, however, the same authority states that Vaisampayana 
composed and gave to his disciples eighty-six Sanhitas. 


02. The parallel passage in the Vayu rather implies that the agreement was to 
meet within seven nights. 

03. Also called the black Yajush. No notice of this legend, as Mr. Colebrooke 
observes (As. lies. VIII. 376), occurs in the Veda itself; and the term 
Taittiriya is more rationally accounted for in the Anukramam or index of 
the black Yajush. It is there said that Vaisampayana taught it to Yaska, 
who taught it to Tittiri, who also became a teacher; whence the term 
Taittiriya, for a grammatical rule explains it to mean, 'The Taittiriyas are 
those who read what was said or repeated by Tittiri.' Panini, 4. 3. 102. 
The legend, then, appears to be nothing more than a Paurariik invention, 
suggested by the equivocal sense of Tittiri, a proper name or a partridge. 
Much of the mythos of the Hindus, and obviously of that of the Greeks 
and Romans, originates in this source. It was not confined, at least 
amongst the former, to the case that Creuzer specifies; "Telle ou telle 
expression cessa d’etre comprise, et l’on inventa des mythes pour 
eclaircir ces malentendus;" but was wilfully perpetrated, even where the 
word was understood, when it afforded a favourable opportunity for a 
fable. It may be suspected in the present instance that the legend is 
posterior, not only to the Veda, but to the grammatical rule, or it would 
have furnished Panini with a different etymology. 

04. This is another specimen of the sort of Paronomasia explained in the 
preceding note. The Charakas are the students of a Sakha, so 
denominated from its teacher Charaka. (As. Res. VIII. 377.) So, again, 
Panini 4. 3. 107: 'The readers of that which is said by Charaka are 
Charakas:' Charaka has no necessary connexion with Chara, 'to go.' The 
Vayu states they were also called Chatakas, from Chat, 'to divide,' 
because they shared amongst them their master's guilt. 'Those pupils of 
Vaisampayana were called Chatakas by whom the crime of Brahmanicide 
was shared; and Charakas from its departure.' 

05. The Vayu names the fifteen teachers of these schools, Kariwa, Vaidheya, 
Salin, Madhyandina, Sapeyin, Vidagdha, Uddalin, Tamrayani, Vatsya, 
Galava, Saisiri, Atavya, Parha, Viraria, and Samparayana, who were the 
founders of no fewer than 101 branches of the Vajasaneyi, or white 
Yajush. Mr. Colebrooke specifies several of these, as the Jabalas, 
Baudhayanas, Tapaniyas, &c. As. Res. VIII. 376. 





06. Chapter 


Divisions of the Sama-veda: of the Atharva-veda. Four Pauranik Sanhitas. 
Names of the eighteen Puranas. Branches of knowledge. Classes of Rishis. 

YOU shall now hear, Maitreya, how Jaimini, the pupil of Vyasa, divided the 
branches of the Sama-veda. The son of Jaimini was Sumantu, and his son was 
Sukarman, who both studied the same Sanhita under Jaimini. The latter 
composed the Sahasra Sanhita (or compilation of a thousand hymns, &c.), which 
he taught to two disciples, Hiranyanabha, also named Kausalya (or of Kosala), 
and Paushyinji. Fifteen disciples of the latter were the authors of as many 
Sanhitas: they were called the northern chaunters of the Saman. As many more, 
also the disciples of Hiranyanabha, were termed the eastern chaunters of the 
Saman, founding an equal number of schools. Lokakshi, Kuthumi, Kushidi, and 
Langali were the pupils of Paushyinji; and by them and their disciples many 
other branches were formed. Whilst another scholar of Hiranyanabha, named 
Kriti, taught twenty-four Sanhitas to as many pupils; and by them, again, was the 
Sama-veda divided into numerous branches. 

I will now give you an account of the Sanhitas of the Atharva-veda. The 
illustrious Muni Sumantu taught this Veda to his pupil Kabandha, who made it 
twofold, and communicated the two portions to Devadersa and to Pathya. The 
disciples of Devadersa were Maudga, Brahmabali, Saulkayani, and Pippalada. 
Pathya had three pupils, Jajali, Kumudadi, and Saunaka; and by all these were 
separate branches instituted. Saunaka having divided his Sanhita into two, gave 
one to Babhru, and the other to Saindhavayana; and from them sprang two 
schools, the Saindhavas and Munjakesas. The principal subjects of difference in 
the Sanhitas of the Atharva-veda are the five Kalpas or ceremonials: the 
Nakshatra Kalpa, or rules for worshipping the planets; the Vaitana Kalpa, or 
mles for oblations, according to the Vedas generally; the Sanhita Kalpa, or rules 
for sacrifices, according to different schools; the Angirasa Kalpa, incantations 
and prayers for the destruction of foes and the like; and the Santi Kalpa, or 
prayers for averting evil. 

Accomplished in the purport of the Puranas, Vyasa compiled a Pauranik Sanhita, 


consisting of historical and legendary traditions, prayers and hymns, and sacred 
chronology. He had a distinguished disciple, Suta, also termed Romaharshana, 
and to him the great Muni communicated the Puranas. Suta had six scholars, 
Sumati, Agnivarchas, Mitrayu, Sansapayana, Akritavrana, who is also called 
Kasyapa, and Saverrii. The three last composed three fundamental Sanhitas; and 
Romaharshana himself compiled a fourth, called Romaharshanika. The 
substance of which four Sanhitas is collected into this (Vishnu) Purana. 

The first of all the Puranas is entitled the Brahma. Those who are acquainted 
with the Puranas enumerate eighteen, or the Brahma, Padma, Vaishnava, Saiva, 

r r 

Bhagavata, Naradiya, Markandeya, Agneya, Bhavishyat, Brahma Vaivartta, 
Lainga, Varaha, Skanda, Vamana, Kaurmma, Matsya, Garura, Brahmanda. The 
creation of the world, and its successive reproductions, the genealogies of the 
patriarchs and kings, the periods of the Manus, and the transactions of the royal 
dynasties, are narrated in all these Puranas. This Purana which I have repeated to 
you, Maitreya, is called the Vaishnava, and is next in the series to the Padma; 
and in every part of it, in its narratives of primary and subsidiary creation, of 
families, and of periods, the mighty Vishnu is declared in this Purana. 

The four Vedas, the six Angas (or subsidiary portions of the Vedas, viz. Siksha, 
rules of reciting the prayers, the accents and tones to be observed; Kalpa, ritual; 
Vyakarana, grammar; Nirukta, glossarial comment; Chhandas, metre; and 
Jyotish, (astronomy), with Mimansa (theology), Nyaya (logic), Dharma (the 
institutes of law), and the Puranas, constitute the fourteen principal branches of 
knowledge: or they are considered as eighteen, with the addition of these four; 
the Ayur-veda, medical science (as taught by Dhanwantari); Dhanur-veda, the 
science of archery or arms, taught by Bhrigu; Gandharba-veda, or the drama, and 
the arts of music, dancing, &c., of which the Muni Bharata was the author; and 
the Artha sastram, or science of government, as laid down first by Vrihaspati. 

There are three kinds of Rishis, or inspired sages; royal Rishis, or princes who 
have adopted a life of devotion, as Viswamitra; divine Rishis, or sages who are 
demigods also, as Narada; and Brahman Rishis, or sages who are the sons of 

r 

Brahma, or Brahmans, as Vasishtha and others. 

I have thus described to you the branches of the Vedas, and their subdivisions; 
the persons by whom they were made; and the reason why they were made (or 



the limited capacities of mankind). The same branches are instituted in the 
different Manwantaras. The primitive Veda, that of the progenitor of all things, is 
eternal: these branches are but its modifications (or Vikalpas). 

I have thus related to you, Maitreya, the circumstances relating to the Vedas, 
which you desired to hear. Of what else do you wish to be informed? 


Footnotes 

01. The Vayu makes Sukarman the grandson of Sumantu, his son being 
called Sunwat. 

02. Some copies read Paushpinji. The Vayu agrees with our text, but alludes 
to a legend of Sukarman having first taught a thousand disciples, but they 
were all killed by Indra, for reading on an unlawful day, or one when 
sacred study is prohibited. 

03. The Vayu specifies many more names than the Vishnu, but the list is 
rather confused. Amongst the descendants of those named in the text, 
Rayananiya (or Ranayaniya), the son of Lokakshi, is the author of a 
Sanhita still extant: Saumitri his son was the author of three Sanhitas: 
Parasara, the son of Kuthumi, compiled and taught six Sanhitas: and 
Saligotra, a son of Langali, established also six schools. Kriti was of 
royal descent: he and Paushyinji were the two most eminent teachers of 
the Sama-veda. 

04. According to the commentator, Munjakesa is another name for Babhru; 
but the Vayu seems to consider him as the pupil of Saindhava, but the 
text is corrupt. 

05. The Vayu has an enumeration of the verses contained in the different 
Vedas, but it is very indistinctly given in many respects, especially as 
regards the Yajush. The Rich is said to comprise 8600 Richas. The 
Yajush, as originally compiled by Vyasa, 12000: of which the Vajasaneyi 
contains 1900 Richas, and 7600 Brahmanas; the Charaka portion 
contains 6026 stanzas: and consequently the whole exceeds 12000 
verses. The stanzas of the Saman are said to be 8014; and those of the 
Atharvan 5980. Mr. Colebrooke states the verses of the whole Yajush to 


be 1987; of the Salapalka Brahmana of the same Veda 7624; and of the 
Atharvan 6015. 

06. Or of stories (Akhyanas) and minor stories or tales (Upakhyanas); of 
portions dedicated to some particular divinity, as the Siva-gita, 
Bhagavad-gita, &c.; and accounts of the periods called Kalpas, as the 
Brahma Kalpa, Varaha Kalpa, &c. 

07. For remarks upon this enumeration, see Introduction. 

08. A similar enumeration is given in the Vayu, with some additions. Rishi is 
derived from Rish, 'to go to' or 'approach.' The Brahmarshis, it is said, are 
descendants of the five patriarchs, who were the founders of races or 

r 

Gotras of Brahmans, or Kasyapa, Vasishtha, Angiras, Atri, and Bhrigu. 
The Devarshis are Nara and Narayaria, the sons of Dharma; the 
Balakhilyas, who sprung from Kratu; Kardama, the son of Pulaha; 
Kuvera, the son of Pulastya; Achala, the son of Pratyusha; Narada and 
Parvata, the sons of Kasyapa. Brahmarshis are Ikshwaku and other 
princes. The Brahmarshis dwell in the sphere of Brahma; the Devarshis 
in the region of the gods; and the Rajarshis in the heaven of Indra. 

09. No notice is taken here of a curious legend which is given in the 
Mahabharata, in the Gada Parvan. It is there said, that during a great 
drought the Brahmans, engrossed by the care of subsistence, neglected 
the study of the sacred books, and the Vedas were lost. The Rishi 
Saraswata alone, being fed with fish by his mother Saraswati, the 
personified river so named, kept up his studies, and preserved the Hindu 
scriptures. At the end of the famine the Brahmans repaired to him to be 
taught, and sixty thousand disciples again acquired a knowledge of the 
Vedas from Saraswata. This legend appears to indicate the revival, or 
more probably the introduction, of the Hindu ritual by the race of 
Brahmans, or the people called Saraswata; for, according to the Hindu 
geographers, it was the name of a nation, as it still is the appellation of a 
class of Brahmans who chiefly inhabit the Panjab. (As. Res. VII. 219, 
338, 341.) The Saraswata Brahmans are met with in many parts of India, 
and are usually fair-complexioned, tall, and handsome men. They are 
classed in the Jati malas, or popular lists of castes, amongst the five 
Gaura Brahmans, and are divided into ten tribes: they are said also to be 
especially the Purohits or family priests of the Kshatriya or military 
castes: (see the Jati mala, printed in Price's Hindi Selections, II. 280:) 
circumstances in harmony with the purport of the legend, and 


confirmatory of the Saraswatas of the Panjab having been prominent 
agents in the establishment of the Hindu religion in India. The holy land 
of the Hindus, or the primary seat, perhaps, of Brahmanism, has for one 
of its boundaries the Saraswati river. 




07. Chapter 


By what means men are exempted from the authority of Yama, as narrated by 
Bhishma to Nakula. Dialogue between Yama and one of his attendants. 
Worshippers of Vishnu not subject to Yama. How they are to be known. 

MAITREYA.—You have indeed related to me, most excellent Brahman, all that I 
asked of you; but I am desirous to hear one thing which you have not touched 
on. This universe, composed of seven zones, with its seven subterrestrial 
regions, and seven spheres—this whole egg of Brahma.—is every where 
swarming with living creatures, large or small, with smaller and smallest, and 
larger and largest; so that there is not the eighth part of an inch in which they do 
not abound. Now all these are captives in the chains of acts, and at the end of 
their existence become slaves to the power of Yama, by whom they are 
sentenced to painful punishments. Released from these inflictions, they are again 
born in the condition of gods, men, or the like: and thus living beings, as the 
Sastras apprise us, perpetually revolve. Now the question I have to ask, and 
which you are so well able to answer, is, by what acts men may free themselves 
from subjection to Yama? 

PARASARA.—This question, excellent Muni, was once asked by Nakula of his 
grandfather Bhishma; and I will repeat to you the reply made by the latter. 

Bhishma said to the prince, "There formerly came on a visit to me a friend of 
mine, a Brahman, from the Kalinga country, who told me that he had once 
proposed this question to a holy Muni, who retained the recollection of his 
former births, and by whom what was, and what will be, was accurately told. 
Being importuned by me, who placed implicit faith in his words, to repeat what 
that pious personage had imparted to him, he at last communicated it to me; and 
what he related I have never met with elsewhere. 

"Having, then, on one occasion, put to him the same question which you have 
asked, the Kalinga Brahman recalled the story that had been told him by the 
Muni—the great mystery that had been revealed to him by the pious sage, who 
remembered his former existence—a dialogue that occurred between Yama and 


one of his ministers. 


"Yama beholding one of his servants with his noose in his hand, whispered to 
him, and said, 'Keep clear of the worshippers of Madhusudana. I am the lord of 
all men, the Vaishnavas excepted. I was appointed by Brahma, who is 
reverenced by all the immortals, to restrain mankind, and regulate the 
consequences of good and evil in the universe. But be who obeys Hari, as his 
spiritual guide, is here independent of me; for Vishnu is of power to govern and 
control me. As gold is one substance still, however diversified as bracelets, 
tiaras, or earrings, so Hari is one and the same, although modified in the forms of 
gods, animals, and man. As the drops of water, raised by wind from the earth, 
sink into the earth again when the wind subsides, so the varieties of gods, men, 
and animals, which have been detached by the agitation of the qualities, are 
reunited, when that disturbance ceases, with the eternal. He who through holy 
knowledge diligently adores the lotus foot of that Hari, who is reverenced by the 
gods, is released from all the bonds of sin; and you must avoid him as you would 
avoid fire fed with oil.' 

"Having heard these injunctions of Yama, the messenger addressed the lord of 
righteousness, and said, 'Tell me, master, how am I to distinguish the worshipper 
of Hari, who is the protector of all beings?' Yama replied, 'You are to consider 
the worshipper of Vishnu, him who never deviates from the duties prescribed to 
his caste; who looks with equal indifference upon friend or enemy; who takes,; 
nothing (that is not his own), nor injures any being. Know that person of 
unblemished mind to be a worshipper of Vishnu. Know him to be a devout 
worshipper of Hari, who has placed Janarddana in his pure mind, which has been 
freed from fascination, and whose soul is undefiled by the soil of the Kali age. 
Know that excellent man to be a worshipper of Vishnu, who, looking upon gold 
in secret, holds that which is another's wealth but as grass, and devotes all his 
thoughts to the lord. Pure is he as a mountain of clear crystal; for how can 
Vishnu abide in the hearts of men with malice and envy, and other evil passions? 
the glowing heat of fire abides not in a cluster of the cooling rays of the moon. 
He who lives pure in thought, free from malice, contented, leading a holy life, 
feeling tenderness for all creatures, speaking wisely and kindly, humble and 
sincere, has Vasudeva ever present in his heart. As the young Sal-tree by its 
beauty declares the excellence of the juices which it has imbibed from the earth, 
so when the eternal has taken up his abode in the bosom of any one, that man is 



lovely amidst the beings of this world. Depart, my servant, quickly from those 
men whose sins have been dispersed by moral and religious merit, whose minds 
are daily dedicated to the imperceptible deity, and who are exempt from pride, 
uncharitableness, and malice. In the heart in which the divine Hari, who is 
without beginning or end, abides, armed with a sword, a shell, and a mace, sin 
cannot remain; for it cannot coexist with that which destroys it, as darkness 
cannot continue in the world when the sun is shining. The eternal makes not his 
abode in the heart of that man who covets another's wealth, who injures living 
creatures, who speaks harshness and untruth, who is proud of his iniquity, and 
whose mind is evil. Janarddana occupies not his thoughts who envies another's 
prosperity, who calumniates the virtuous, who never sacrifices nor bestows gifts 
upon the pious, who is blinded by the property of darkness. That vile wretch is 
no worshipper of Vishnu, who through avarice is unkind to his nearest friends 
and relations, to his wife, children, parents, and dependants. The brute-like man 
whose thoughts are evil, who is addicted to unrighteous acts, who ever seeks the 
society of the wicked, and suffers no day to pass without the perpetration of 
crime, is no worshipper of Vasudeva. Do you proceed afar off from those in 
whose hearts Ananta is enshrined; from him whose sanctified understanding 
conceives the supreme male and ruler, Vasudeva, as one with his votary, and 
with all this world. Avoid those holy persons who are constantly invoking the 
lotus-eyed Vasudeva, Vishnu, the supporter of the earth, the immortal wielder of 
the discus and the shell, the asylum of the world. Come not into the sight of him 
in whose heart the imperishable soul resides, for he is defended from my power 
by the discus of his deity: he is designed for another world (for the heaven of 
Vishnu).' 

"'Such,' said the Kalinga Brahman, 'were the instructions communicated by the 
deity of justice, the son of the sun, to his servants, as they were repeated to me 
by that holy personage, and as I have related them to you, chief of the house of 
Kuru' (Bhishma). So also, Nakula, I have faithfully communicated to you all I 
heard from my pious friend, when he came from his country of Kalinga to visit 
me. I have thus explained to you, as was fitting, that there is no protection in the 
ocean of the world except Vishnu; and that the servants and ministers of Yama, 
the king of the dead himself, and his tortures, are all unavailing against one who 
places his reliance on that divinity." 


I have thus, resumed Parasara, related to you what you wished to hear, and what 



was said by the son of Vivaswat. What else do you wish to hear? 




Footnotes 

01. Nakula is one of the Paridava princes, and consequently grand-nephew, 
not grandson, of Bhishma: he is great grandson of Parasara; and it is 
rather an anomaly for the latter to cite a conversation in which Nakula 
formerly bore a part. 

02. Or Yama and Niyama. The duties intended by these terms are variously 
enumerated. The commentator on the text specifics under the first head, 
absence of violence or cruelty to other beings (Ahinsa), honesty (Asteya), 
truth (Satya), chastity (Brahmacharyya), and disinterestedness or non- 
acceptance of gifts (Aparigraha). Under Niyama are comprehended 
purity (Saucha), contentment (Santosha), devotion (Tapas), study of the 
Vedas (Swadhyaya), and adoration of the supreme (Iswara-prariidhana). 

03. Or Vaivaswata. This section is called the Yama gita. 




08. Chapter 


How Vishnu is to be worshipped, as related by Aurva to Sagara. Duties of the 
four castes, severally and in common: also in time of distress. 

MAITREYA.—Inform me, venerable teacher, how the supreme deity, the lord of 
the universe, Vishnu, is worshipped by those who are desirous of overcoming the 
world; and what advantages are reaped by men, assiduous in his adoration, from 
the propitiated Govinda. 

PARASARA.—The question you have asked was formerly put by Sagara to 
Aurva. I will repeat to you his reply. 

Sagara having bowed down before Aurva, the descendant of Bhrigu, asked him 
what were the best means of pleasing Vishnu, and what would be the 
consequence of obtaining his favour. Aurva replied, "He who pleases Vishnu 
obtains all terrestrial enjoyments; heaven and a place in heaven; and what is best 
of all, final liberation: whatever he wishes, and to whatever extent, whether 
much or little, he receives it, when Achyuta is content with him. In what manner 
his favour is to be secured, that also I will, oh king, impart to you, agreeably to 
your desire. The supreme Vishnu is propitiated by a man who observes the 
institutions of caste, order, and purificatory practices: no other path is the way to 
please him. He who offers sacrifices, sacrifices to him; he who murmurs prayer, 
prays to him; he who injures living creatures, injures him; for Hari is all beings. 
Janarddana therefore is propitiated by him who is attentive to established 
observances, and follows the duties prescribed for his caste. The Brahman, the 
Kshatriya, the Vaisya, and the Sudra, who attends to the rules enjoined his caste, 
best worships Vishnu. Kesava is most pleased with him who does good to others; 
who never utters abuse, calumny, or untruth; who never covets another's wife or 
another's wealth, and who bears ill-will towards none; who neither beats nor 
slays any animate or inanimate thing; who is ever diligent in the service of the 
gods, of the. Brahmans, and of his spiritual preceptor; who is always desirous of 
the welfare of all creatures, of his children, and of his own soul; in whose pure 
heart no pleasure is derived from the imperfections of love and hatred. The man, 
oh monarch, who conforms to the duties enjoined by scriptural authority for 


every caste and condition of life, is he who best worships Vishnu: there is no 
other mode." 

Aurva having thus spoken, Sagara said to him, "Tell me then, venerable 
Brahman, what are the duties of caste and condition I am desirous of knowing 
them." To which Aurva answered and said, "Attentively listen to the duties 
which I shall describe as those severally of the Brahman, the Kshatriya, the 
Vaisya, and the Sudra. The Brahman should make gifts, should worship the gods 
with sacrifices, should be assiduous in studying the Vedas, should perform 
ablutions and libations with water, and should preserve the sacred flame. For the 
sake of subsistence he may offer sacrifices on behalf of others, and may instruct 
them in the Sastras; and he may accept presents of a liberal description in a 
becoming manner (or from respectable persons, and at an appropriate season). 
He must ever seek to promote the good of others, and do evil unto none; for the 
best riches of a Brahman are universal benevolence. He should look upon the 
jewels of another person as if they were pebbles; and should, at proper periods, 
procreate offspring by his wife. These are the duties of a Brahman. 

"The man of the warrior tribe should cheerfully give presents to Brahmans, 
perform various sacrifices, and study the scriptures. His especial sources of 
maintenance are arms and the protection of the earth. The guardianship of the 
earth is indeed his especial province: by the discharge of this duty a king attains 
his objects, and realizes a share of the merit of all sacrificial rites. By 
intimidating the bad, and cherishing the good, the monarch who maintains the 
discipline of the different castes secures whatever region he desires. 

"Brahma, the great parent of creation, gave to the Vaisya the occupations of 
commerce and agriculture, and the feeding of flocks and herds, for his means of 
livelihood; and sacred study, sacrifice, and donation are also his duties, as is the 
observance of fixed and occasional rites. 

"Attendance upon the three regenerate castes is the province of the Sudra, and by 
that he is to subsist, or by the profits of trade, or the earnings of mechanical 
labour. He is also to make gifts; and he may offer the sacrifices in which food is 
presented, as well as obsequial offerings. 


"Besides these their respective obligations, there are duties equally incumbent 



upon all the four castes. These are, the acquisition of property, for the support of 
their families; cohabitation with their wives, for the sake of progeny; tenderness 
towards all creatures, patience, humility, truth, purity, contentment, decency of 
decoration, gentleness of speech, friendliness; and freedom from envy and 
repining, from avarice, and from detraction. These also are the duties of every 
condition of life. 

"In times of distress the peculiar functions of the castes may be modified, as you 
shall hear. A Brahman may follow the occupations of a Kshatriya or a Vaisya; 
the Kshatriya may adopt those of the Vaisya; and the Vaisya those of the 
Kshatriya: but these two last should never descend to the functions of the Sudra, 
if it be possible to avoid them and if that be not possible, they must at least shun 
the functions of the mined castes. I will now, Raja, relate to you the duties of the 
several Asramas or conditions of life." 


Footnotes 

01. Sagara, as we shall see, was a king of the solar race. Aurva was a sage, 
the grandson of Bhrigu. When the sons of king Kritavirya persecuted and 
slew the children of Bhrigu, to recover the wealth which their father had 
lavished upon them, they destroyed even the children in the womb. One 
of the women of the race of Bhrigu, in order to preserve her embryo, 
secreted it in her thigh (Uru), whence the child on his birth was named 
Aurva: from his wrath proceeded a flame, that threatened to destroy the 
world; but at the persuasion of his ancestors he cast it into the ocean, 
where it abode with the face of a horse. Aurva was afterwards religious 
preceptor to Sagara, and bestowed upon him the Agneyastram, or fiery 
weapon, with which he conquered the tribes of barbarians, who had 
invaded his patrimonial possessions. Mahabh. Adi Parvan, Dana Dharma 
P., Hari Vansa. 

02. Most of the Puranas, especially the Kurma, Padma, Vamana, Agni, and 
Garuda, contain chapters or sections more or less in detail upon the moral 
and ceremonial duties of the Hindus; and a considerable portion of the 
Mahabharata, especially in the Moksha Dharma Parvan, is devoted to the 


same subject. No other Pauranik work, however, contains a series of 
chapters exactly analogous to those which follow, and which contain a 
compendious and systematic description of the Acharas, or personal and 
social obligations of the Hindus. The tenor of the whole is conformable 
to the institutes of Manu, and many passages are the same. 

03. The Pakayajna, or sacrifice in which food is offered, implies either the 
worship of the Viswadevas, the rites of hospitality, or occasional 
oblations, on building a house, the birth of a child, or any occasion of 
rejoicing. It is to be understood, however, that this injunction intends his 
performing these ceremonies through the agency of a Brahman, as a 
Sudra cannot repeat the Mantras or prayers that accompany them; and it 
might be a question how far he might be present, for he ought not even to 
hear such prayers repeated. The performance of funeral rites involves 
some personal share, and the Sudra must present the cakes, but it must be 
done without Mantras; as the Mitakshara; 'This rite (the presentation of 
cakes) must be performed by the Sudras, without formula:, on the twelfth 
day.' The Vayu P. directs the performance of the five great sacrifices by 
Sudras, only omitting the Mantras: It may be suspected that the Puranas 
relaxed in some degree from the original rigour; for it may be inferred 
that the great ceremonies were altogether withheld from Sudras in the 
time of Manu, who declares that none have any right or part (Adhikara) 
in his code except those who perform rites with Mantras, or the three 
regenerate castes (II. 16); and denounces as heinous sins teaching the 
Vedas to Sudras, performing sacrifices for them, or taking gifts from 
them. X. 309, 110, 111. Yajnawalkya, however, allows them to perform 
five great rites with the Namaskara, or the simple salutation: which 
Gotama confirms. Some restrict the sense of Mantra, also, to the prayers 
of the Vedas, and allow the Sudras to use those of the Puranas; as 
Sulapani: and the Titthi Tatwa is cited in the Sudra Kamalakara as 
allowing them any Mantras except those of the Vedas. 

04. This last clause reconciles what would else appear to be an 
incompatibility with Manu, who permits the Vaisya in time of distress to 
descend to the servile acts of a Sudra. X. 98. 




09. Chapter 


Duties of the religious student, householder, hermit, and mendicant. 

AURVA continued.—"When the youth has been invested with the thread of his 
caste, let him diligently prosecute the study of the Vedas, in the house of his 
preceptor, with an attentive spirit, and leading a life of continence. He is to wait 
upon his Guru, assiduously observant of purificatory practices, and the Veda is to 
be acquired by him, whilst he is regular in the performance of religious rites. In 
the morning Sandhya he is first to salute the sun; in the evening, fire; and then to 
address his preceptor with respect. He must stand when his master is standing; 
move when he is walking; and sit beneath him when he is seated: he must never 
sit, nor walk, nor stand when his teacher does the reverse. When desired by him, 
let him read the Veda attentively, placed before his preceptor; and let him eat the 
food he has collected as alms, when permitted by his teacher. Let him bathe in 
water which has first been used for his preceptor's ablutions; and every morning 
bring fuel and water, and whatsoever else may be required. 

"When the scriptural studies appropriate to the student have been completed, and 
he has received dismissal from his Guru, let the regenerate man enter into the 
order of the householder; and taking unto himself, with lawful ceremonies, 
house, wife, and wealth, discharge to the best of his ability the duties of his 
station satisfying the manes with funeral cakes; the gods with oblations; guests 
with hospitality; the sages with holy study; the progenitors of mankind with 
progeny; the spirits with the residue of oblations; and all the world with words of 
truth. A householder secures heaven by the faithful discharge of these 
obligations. There are those who subsist upon alms, and lead an erratic life of 
self-denial, at the end of the term during which they have kept house. They 
wander over the world to see the earth, and perform their ablutions, with rites 
enjoined by the Vedas, at sacred shrines: houseless, and without food, and 
resting for the night at the dwelling at which they arrive in the evening. The 
householder is to them a constant refuge and parent: it is his duty to give them a 
welcome, and to address them with kindness; and to provide them, whenever 
they come to his house, with a bed, a seat, and food. A guest disappointed by a 
householder, who turns away from his door, transfers to the latter all his own 


misdeeds, and bears away his religious merit. In the house of a good man, 
contumely, arrogance, hypocrisy, repining, contradiction, and violence are 
annihilated: and the householder who fully performs this his chief duty of 
hospitality is released from every kind of bondage, and obtains the highest of 
stations after death. 

"When the householder, after performing the acts incumbent on his condition, 
arrives at the decline of life, let him consign his wife to the care of his sons, and 
go himself to the forests. Let him there subsist upon leaves, roots, and fruit; and 
suffer his hair and beard to grow, and braid the former upon his brows; and sleep 
upon the ground: his dress must be made of skin or of Kasa or Kusa grasses; and 
he must bathe thrice a day; and he must offer oblations to the gods and to fire, 
and treat all that come to him with hospitality: he must beg alms, and present 
food to all creatures: he must anoint himself with such unguents as the woods 
afford; and in his devotional exercises he must be endurant of heat and cold. The 
sage who diligently follows these rules, and leads the life of the hermit (or 
Vanaprastha), consumes, like fire, all imperfections, and conquers for himself 
the mansions of eternity. 

"The fourth order of men is called that of the mendicant; the circumstances of 
which it is fit, oh king, that you should hear from me. Let the unimpassioned 
man, relinquishing all affection for wife, children, and possessions, enter the 
fourth order. Let him forego the three objects of human existence (pleasure, 
wealth, and virtue), whether secular or religious, and, indifferent to friends, be 
the friend of all living beings. Let him, occupied with devotion, abstain from 
wrong, in act, word, or thought, to all creatures, human or brute; and equally 
avoid attachment to any. Let him reside but for one night in a village, and not 
more than five nights at a time in a city; and let him so abide, that good-will, and 
not animosity, may be engendered. Let him, for the support of existence, apply 
for alms at the houses of the three first castes, at the time when the fires have 
been extinguished, and people have eaten. Let the wandering mendicant call 
nothing his own, and suppress desire, anger, covetousness, pride, and folly. The 
sage who gives no cause for alarm to living beings need never apprehend any 
danger from them. Having deposited the sacrificial fire in his own person, the 
Brahman feeds the vital flame, with the butter that is collected as alms, through 
the altar of his mouth; and by means of his spiritual fire he proceeds to his own 
proper abode. But the twice-born man, who seeks for liberation, and is pure of 



heart, and whose mind is perfected by self-investigation, secures the sphere of 
Brahma, which is tranquil, and is as a bright flame that emits not smoke." 




Footnotes 

01. These directions are the same as those prescribed by Manu, though not 
precisely in the same words. II. 175, et seq. 

02. So Manu, III. 4, &c. 

03. The great obligations, or, as Sir Wm. Jones terms them, sacraments, the 
Mahayajnas, or great sacrifices, are, according to Manu, but five; 
Brahmayajna, sacred study; Pitriyajna, libations to the manes; 
Devayajna, burnt-offerings to the gods; Baliyajna, offerings to all 
creatures; and Nriyajna, hospitality. III. 70, 71. The Prajapatiyajna, or 
propagation of offspring, and Satyayajna, observance of truth, are 
apparently later additions. 

04. This is also the doctrine of Manu, III. 100. 

05. Manu, VI. 3, &c. 

06. Manu, VI. 33, &c. 

07. The text uses the term Dwijati, which designates a man of the three first 
castes. The commentator cites various authorities to prove that its sense 
should be Brahman only, who alone is permitted to enter the fourth 
order.—'Entrance into the fourth order is never for the Kshatriya and 
Vaisya. Entrance into the fourth order is for Brahmans, according to 
Swayambhu. So says Dattatreya: "Let the Brahman proceed from his 
dwelling is also the expression of Yama, Samvartta, and Baudhayana.'" 
But this is not the general understanding of the law, nor was it originally 
so restricted apparently. Manu does not so limit it. 




10. Chapter 


Ceremonies to be observed at the birth and naming of a child. Of marrying, or 
leading a religious life. Choice of a wife. Different modes of marrying. 

SAGARA then addressed Aurva, and said, "You have described to me, venerable 
Brahman, the duties of the four orders and of the four castes. I am now desirous 
to hear from you the religious institutes which men should individually observe, 
whether they be invariable, occasional, or voluntary. Describe these to me; for all 
things are known, chief of Bhrigu's race, unto you." To this Aurva replied, "I will 
communicate to you, oh king, that which you have asked, the invariable and 
occasional rites which men should perform: do you attend. 

"When a son is born, let his father perform for him the ceremonies proper on the 
birth of a child, and all other initiatory rites, as well as a Sraddha, which is a 
source of prosperity. Let him feed a couple of Brahmans, seated with their faces 
to the east; and according to his means offer sacrifices to the gods and 
progenitors. Let him present to the manes balls of meat mixed with curds, barley, 
and jujubes, with the part of his hand sacred to the gods, or with that sacred to 
Prajapati. Let a Brahman perform such a Sraddha, with all its offerings and 
circumambulations, on every occasion of good fortune. 

"Next, upon the tenth day after birth, let the father give a name to his child; the 
first term of which shall be the appellation of a god, the second of a man, as 
Sarman or Varman; the former being the appropriate designation of a Brahman, 
the latter of a warrior; whilst Gupta and Dasa are best fitted for the names of 
Vaisyas and Sudras. A name should not be void of meaning; it should not be 
indecent, nor absurd, nor ill-omened, nor fearful; it should consist of an even 
number of syllables; it should not be too long nor too short, nor too full of long 
vowels; but contain a due proportion of short vowels, and be easily articulated. 
After this and the succeeding initiatory rites, the purified youth is to acquire 
religious knowledge, in the mode that has been described, in the dwelling of his 
spiritual guide. 

"When he has finished his studies, and given the parting donation to his 


preceptor, the man who wishes to lead the life of a householder must take a wife. 
If he does not propose to enter into the married state, he may remain as a student 
with his teacher, first making a vow to that effect, and employ himself in the 
service of his preceptor and of that preceptor's descendants; or he may at once 
become a hermit, or adopt the order of the religious mendicant, according to his 
original determination. 

"If he marry, he must select a maiden who is of a third of his age one who has 
not too much hair, but is not without any; one who is not very black nor yellow 
complexioned, and who is not from birth a cripple or deformed. He must not 
marry a girl who is vicious or unhealthy, of low origin, or labouring under 
disease; one who has been ill brought up; one who talks improperly; one who 
inherits some malady from father or mother; one who has a beard, or who is of a 
masculine appearance; one who speaks thick or thin, or croaks like a raven; one 
who keeps her eyes shut, or has the eyes very prominent; one who has hairy legs, 
or thick ancles; or one who has dimples in her cheeks when she laughs. Let not a 
wise and prudent man marry a girl of such a description: nor let a considerate 
man wed a girl of a harsh skin; or one with white nails; or one with red eyes, or 
with very fat hands and feet; or one who is a dwarf, or who is very tall; or one 
whose eyebrows meet, or whose teeth are far apart, and resemble tusks. Let a 
householder marry a maiden who is in kin at least five degrees remote from his 
mother, and seven from his father, with the ceremonies enjoined by law. 

"The forms of marriage are eight, the Brahma, Daiva, the Arsha, Prajapatya, 
Asura, Gandharba, Rakshasa, and Paisacha; which last is the worst but the caste 
to which either form has been enjoined as lawful by inspired sages should avoid 
any other mode of taking a wife. The householder who espouses a female 
connected with him by similarity of religious and civil obligations, and along 
with her discharges the duties of his condition, derives from such a wife great 
benefits." 




Footnotes 


01. To the Nandimukhas. The Pitris, or progenitors, are so termed here from 


words occurring in the prayer used on the occasion of a festive Sraddha. 
As. Res. VII. 270. 

02. With the Daiva tirtha, the tips of the fingers; or with the Prajapatya tirtha, 
the part of the hand at the root of the little finger. Manu, II. 58, 59. The 
second is called by Manu the Kaya tirtha, from Ka, a synonyme of 
Prajapati. 

03. The Sraddha is commonly an obsequial or funeral sacrifice, but it implies 
offerings to the progenitors of an individual and of mankind, and always 
forms part of a religious ceremony on an occasion of rejoicing or an 
accession of prosperity, this being termed the Abhyudaya or Vriddhi 
Sraddha. As. Res. VII. 270. 

04. So Manu, II. 30, 31, 32. The examples given in the comment are, 
Somasarman, Indravarman, Chandragupta, and Sivadasa, respectively 
appropriate appellations of men of the four castes. 

05. Or Sanskaras; initiatory ceremonies, purificatory of the individual at 
various stages. 

06. Or the vow or pledge he has taken, that he will follow for life the 
observances of the student or ascetic; both of which are enumerated in 
the Nirnaya Sindhu, as acts prohibited in the Kali age; a man is not to 
continue a student or Brahmachari, i. e. a caenobite, for life; nor is he to 
become a mendicant without previously passing through the order of 
householder. In practice, however, the prohibition is not unfrequently 
disregarded. 

07. By this is to be understood, according to the commentator, merely a 
young girl, but at the same time one not immature; for otherwise, he 
observes, a man of thirty, by which age he completes his sacred studies, 
would espouse a girl of but ten years of age. According to Manu, 
however, the period of religious study does not terminate until thirty-six; 
and in the East a girl of twelve would be marriageable. The text of 
Yajnawalkya has merely the word Yaviyasi, 'a very young woman.' It is 
worthy of remark here, that neither that text, nor the text of Manu, nor 
the interpretation of our text, authorizes the present practice of the 
nuptials of children. The obligation imposed upon a man of a life of 
perfect continence until he is more than thirty is singularly Malthusian. 

08. For the credit of Hindu taste it is to be noticed that the commentator 
observes the hemistich in which this last clause occurs is not found in all 
copies of the text. 


09. See Manu, III. 5, &c. 

10. These different modes of marriage a described by Manu, III. 27, &c. 




11. Chapter 


Of the Sadacharas, or perpetual obligations of a householder. Daily purifications, 
ablutions, libations, and oblations: hospitality: obsequial rites: ceremonies to be 
observed at meals, at morning and evening worship, and on going to rest. 

SAGARA again said to Aurva, "Relate to me, Muni, the fixed observances of the 
householder, by attending to which he will never be rejected from this world or 
the next." 

Aurva replied to him thus: "Listen, prince, to an account of those perpetual 
observances, by adhering to which both worlds are subdued. Those who are 
called Sadhus (saints) are they who are free from all defects; and the term Sat 
means the same, or Sadhu: those practices or observances (Acharas) which they 
follow are therefore called Sadacharas, the institutions or observances of the 
pious.' The seven Rishis, the Manus, the patriarchs, are they who have enjoined 
and who have practised these observances. Let the wise man awake in the 
Muhurtta of Brahma, (or in the third Muhurtta, about two hours before sunrise), 
and with a composed mind meditate on two of the objects of life (virtue and 
wealth), and on topics not incompatible with them. Let him also think upon 
desire, as not conflicting with the other two; and thus contemplate with equal 
indifference the three ends of life, for the purpose of counter- acting the unseen 
consequences of good or evil acts. Let him avoid wealth and desire, if they give 
uneasiness to virtue; and abstain from virtuous or religious acts, if they involve 
misery, or are censured by the world. Having risen, he must offer adoration to 
the sun; and then, in the south-east quarter, at the distance of a bowshot or more, 
or any where remote from the village, void the impurities of nature. The water 
that remains after washing his feet he must throw away into the courtyard of the 
house. A wise man will never void urine on his own shadow, nor on the shadow 
of a tree, nor on a cow, nor against the sun, nor on fire, nor against the wind, nor 
on his Guru, nor men of the three first castes; nor will he pass either excrement 
in a ploughed field, or pasturage, or in the company of men, or on a high road, or 
in rivers and the like, which are holy, or on the bank of a stream, or in a place 
where bodies are burnt; or any where quickly. By day let him void them with his 
face to the north, and by night with his face to the south, when he is not in 


trouble. Let him perform these actions in silence, and without delay; covering his 
head with a cloth, and the ground with grass. Let him not take, for the purposes 
of cleanliness, earth from an ant-hill, nor a rat-hole, nor from water, nor from the 
residue of what has been so used, nor soil that has been employed to plaster a 
cottage, nor such as has been thrown up by insects, or turned over by the plough. 
All such kinds of earth let him avoid, as means of purification. One handful is 
sufficient after voiding urine; three after passing ordure: then ten handfulls are to 
be rubbed over the left hand, and seven over both hands. Let him then rince his 
mouth with water that is pure, neither fetid, nor frothy, nor full of bubbles; and 
again use earth to cleanse his feet, washing them well with water. He is to drink 
water then three times, and twice wash his face with it; and next touch with it his 
head, the cavities of the eyes, ears, and nostrils, the forehead, the navel, and the 
heart. Having finally washed his mouth, a man is to clean and dress his hair, and 
to decorate his person, before a glass, with unguents, garlands, and perfumes. He 
is then, according to the custom of his caste, to acquire wealth, for the sake of 
subsistence; and with a lively faith worship the gods. Sacrifices with the acid 
juice, those with clarified butter, and those with offerings of food, are 
comprehended in wealth: wherefore let men exert themselves to acquire wealth 
for these purposes. 

"As preparatory to all established rites of devotion the householder should bathe 
in the water of a river, a pond, a natural channel, or a mountain torrent; or he 
may bathe upon dry ground, with water drawn from a well, or taken from a, 
river, or other source, where there is any objection to bathing on the spot. When 
bathed, and clad in clean clothes, let him devoutly offer libations to the gods, 
sages, and progenitors, with the parts of the hand severally sacred to each. He 
must scatter water thrice, to gratify the gods; as many times, to please the Rishis; 
and once, to propitiate Prajapati: he must also make three libations, to satisfy the 
progenitors. He must then present, with the part of the hand sacred to the manes, 
water to his paternal grandfather and great-grandfather, to his maternal 
grandfather, great-grandfather, and his father; and at pleasure to his own mother 
and his mother's mother and grandmother, to the wife of his preceptor, to his 
preceptor, his maternal uncle, and other relations, to a dear friend, and to the 
king. Let him also, after libations have been made to the gods and the rest, 
present others at pleasure for the benefit of all beings, reciting inaudibly this 
prayer; 'May the gods, demons, Yakshas, serpents, Rakshasas, Gandharbas, 
Pisachas, Guhyakas, Siddhas, Kushmaridas, trees, birds, fish, all that people the 



waters, or the earth, or the air, be propitiated by the water I have presented to 
them. This water is given by me for the alleviation of the pains of all those who 
are suffering in the realms of hell. May all those who are my kindred, and not 
my kindred, and who were my relations in a former life, all who desire libations 
from me, receive satisfaction from this water. May this water and sesamum, 
presented by me, relieve the hunger and thirst of all who are suffering from those 
inflictions, wheresoever they may be.' Presentations of water, given in the 
manner, oh king, which I have described, yield gratification to all the world: and 
the sinless man, who in the sincerity of faith pours out these voluntary libations, 
obtains the merit that results from affording nutriment to all creatures. 

"Having then rinced his mouth, he is to offer water to the sun, touching his 
forehead with his hands joined, and with this prayer; 'Salutation to Vivaswat, the 
radiant, the glory of Vishnu; to the pure illuminator of the world; to Savitri, the 
granter of the fruit of acts.' He is then to perform the worship of the house, 
presenting to his tutelary deity water, flowers, and incense. He is next to offer 
oblations with fire, not preceded by any other rite, to Brahma. Having invoked 
Prajapati, let him pour oblations reverently to his household gods, to Kasyapa 
and to Anumati, in succession. The residue of the oblation let him offer to the 
earth, to water, and to rain, in a pitcher at hand; and to Dhatri and Vidhatri at the 
doors of his house, and in the middle of it to Brahma. Let the wise man also offer 
the Bali, consisting of the residue of the oblations, to Indra, Yama, Varuna, and 
Soma, at the four cardinal points of his dwelling, the east and the rest; and in the 
north-east quarter he will present it to Dhanwantari. After having thus 
worshipped the domestic deities, he will next offer part of the residue to all the 
gods (the Viswadevas); then, in the north-west quarter, to Vayu (wind); then, in 
all directions, to the points of the horizon, to Brahma, to the atmosphere, and to 
the sun; to all the gods, to all beings, to the lords of beings, to the Pitris, to 
twilight. Then taking other rice, let the householder at pleasure cast it upon a 
clean spot of ground, as an offering to all beings, repeating with collected mind 
this prayer; 'May gods, men, animals, birds, saints, Yakshas, serpents, demons, 
ghosts, goblins, trees, all that desire food given by me; may ants, worms, moths, 
and other insects, hungered and bound in the bonds of acts; may all obtain 
satisfaction from the food left them by me, and enjoy happiness. May they who 
have neither mother, nor father, nor relations, nor food, nor the means of 
preparing it, be satisfied and pleased with the food presented for their 
contentment. Inasmuch as all beings, and this food, and I, and Vishnu are not 



different, I therefore give for their sustenance the food that is one with the body 
of all creatures. May all beings, that are comprehended in the fourteen orders of 
existent things, be satisfied with the food bestowed by me for their gratification, 
and be delighted.' Having uttered this prayer, let the devout believer cast the food 
upon the ground, for the nourishment of all kinds of beings; for the householder 
is thence the supporter of them all. Let him scatter food upon the ground for 
dogs, outcasts, birds, and all fallen and degraded persons. 

"The householder is then to remain at eventide in his courtyard as long as it takes 
to milk a cow, or longer if he pleases, to await the arrival of a guest. Should such 
a one arrive, he is to be received with a hospitable welcome; a seat is to be 
offered to him, and his feet are to be washed, and food is to be given him with 
liberality, and he is to be civilly and kindly spoken to; and when he departs, to be 
sent away by his host with friendly wishes. A householder should ever pay 
attention to a guest who is not an inhabitant of the same village, but who comes 
from another place, and whose name and lineage are unknown. He who feeds 
himself, and neglects the poor and friendless stranger in want of hospitality, goes 
to hell. Let a householder who has a knowledge of Brahma reverence a guest, 
without inquiring his studies, his school, his practices, or his race. 

"A householder should also at the perpetual Sraddha entertain another Brahman, 
who is of his own country, whose family and observances are known, and who 
performs the five sacramental rites. He is likewise to present to a Brahman 
learned in the Vedas four handbills of food, set apart with the exclamation 
Hanta; and he is to give to a mendicant religious student three handbills of rice, 
or according to his pleasure when he has ample means. These, with the addition 
of the mendicant before described, are to be considered as guests; and he who 
treats these four descriptions of persons with hospitality acquits himself of the 
debt due to his fellow men. The guest who departs disappointed from any house, 
and proceeds elsewhere, transfers his sins to the owner of that mansion, and 
takes away with him such a householder's merits. Brahma, Prajapati, Indra, fire, 
the Vasus, the sun, are present in the person of a guest, and partake of the food 
that is given to him. Let a man therefore be assiduous in discharging the duties 
of hospitality; for he who eats his food without bestowing any upon a guest feeds 
only upon iniquity. 


"In the next place the householder must provide food for a married damsel, 



remaining in her father's dwelling; for any one who is ill; for a pregnant woman; 
for the aged and the infants of his house; and then he may eat himself. He who 
eats whilst these are yet unfed is guilty of sin in this life, and when he dies is 
condemned in hell to feed upon phlegm. So he who eats without performing 
ablutions is fed in hell with filth; and he who repeats not his prayers, with matter 
and blood: he who eats unconsecrated food, with urine; and he who eats before 
the children and the rest are fed is stuffed in Tartarus with ordure. Hear therefore, 
oh king of kings, how a householder should feed, so that in eating no sin may be 
incurred, that invariable health and increased vigour may be secured, and all 
evils and hostile machinations may be averted. Let the householder, having 
bathed, and offered libations to the gods and manes, and decorated his hand with 
jewels, proceed to take his meal, after having repeated the introductory prayers, 
and offered oblations with fire, and having given food to guests, to Brahmans, to 
his elders, and to his family. He must not eat with a single garment on, nor with 
wet hands and feet, but dressed in clean clothes, perfumed, and wearing garlands 
of flowers: he must not eat with his face to any intermediate point of the horizon, 
but fronting the east or the north: and thus, with a smiling countenance, happy 
and attentive, let him partake of food, of good quality, wholesome, boiled with 
clean water, procured from no vile person nor by improper means, nor 
improperly cooked. Having given a portion to his hungry companions, let him 
take his food without reproach out of a clean handsome vessel, which must not 
be placed upon a low stool or bed. He must not eat in an unfit place or out of 
season, nor in an incommodious attitude; nor must he first cast any of his meal 
into the fire. Let his food be made holy with suitable texts; let it be good of its 
kind; and it must not be stale, except in the case of fruit or meatnor must it be of 
dry vegetable substances, other than jujubes or preparations of molasses; but 
never must a man eat of that of which the juices have been extracted . Nor must 
a man eat so as to leave no residue of his meal, except in the case of flour, cakes, 
honey, water, curds, and butter. Let him, with an attentive mind, first taste that 
which has a sweet flavour: he may take salt and sour things in the middle course, 
and finish with those which are pungent and bitter. The man who commences his 
meal with fluids, then partakes of solid food, and finishes with fluids again, will 
ever be strong and healthy. In this manner let him feed without fault, silent, and 
contented with his food; taking, without uttering a word, to the extent of five 
handfulls, for the nutriment of the vital principle. Having eaten sufficiently, the 
householder is then to rinse his mouth, with his face turned towards the east or 
the north; and having again sipped water, he is to wash his hands from the wrist 



downwards. With a pleased and tranquil spirit he is then to take a seat, and call 
to memory his tutelary deity; and then he is thus to pray: 'May fire, excited by 
air, convert this food into the earthly elements of this frame, and in the space 
afforded by the etherial atmosphere cause it to digest, and yield me satisfaction! 
May this food, in its assimilation, contribute to the vigour of the earth, water, 
fire, and air of my body, and afford unmixed gratification! May Agasti, Agni, 
and submarine fire effect the digestion of the food of which I have eaten; may 
they grant me the happiness which its conversion into nutriment engenders; and 
may health ever animate my form! May Vishnu, who is the chief principle of all 
invested with bodily structure and the organs of sense, be propitiated by my faith 
in him, and influence the assimilation of the invigorating food which I have 
eaten! For verily Vishnu is the eater and the food and the nutriment: and through 
this belief may that which I have eaten be digested.' 

"Having repeated this prayer, the householder should rub his stomach with his 
hand, and without indolence perform such rites as confer repose, passing the day 
in such amusements as are authorized by holy writings, and are not incompatible 
with the practices of the righteous; until the Sandhya, when he must engage in 
pious meditation. At the Sandhya, at the close of the day he must perform the 
usual rites before the sun has quite set; and in the morning he must perform them 
before the stars have disappeared. The morning and evening rites must never be 
neglected, except at seasons of impurity, anxiety, sickness, or alarm. He who is 
preceded by the sun in rising, or sleeps when the sun is setting, unless it proceed 
from illness and the like, incurs guilt which requires atonement; and therefore let 
a man rise before the sun in the morning, and sleep not until after be has set. 
They who sinfully omit both the morning and the evening service go after death 
to the hell of darkness. In the evening, then, having again dressed food, let the 
wife of the householder, in order to obtain the fruit of the Vaiswadeva rite, give 
food, without prayers, to outcasts and unclean spirits. Let the householder 
himself, according to his means, again shew hospitality to any guest who may 
arrive, welcoming him with the salutation of evening, water for his feet, a seat, a 
supper, and a bed. The sin of want of hospitality to a guest who comes after 
sunset is eight times greater than that of turning away one who arrives by day. A 
man should therefore most especially shew respect to one who comes to him in 
the evening for shelter, as the attentions that gratify him will give pleasure to all 
the gods. Let the householder, then, according to his ability, afford a guest food, 
potherbs, water, a bed, a mat, or, if he can do no more, ground on which to lie. 



"After eating his evening meal, and having washed his feet, the householder is to 
go to rest. His bed is to be entire, and made of wood: it is not to be scanty, nor 
cracked, nor uneven, nor dirty, nor infested by insects, nor without a bedding: 
and he is to sleep with his head either to the east or to the south; any other 
position is unhealthy. In due season a man should approach his wife, when a 
fortunate asterism prevails, in an auspicious moment, and on even nights, if she 
is not unbathed, sick, unwell, averse, angry, pregnant, hungry, or over-fed. He 
should be also free from similar imperfections, should be neatly attired and 
adorned, and animated by tenderness and affection. There are certain days on 
which unguents, flesh, and women are unlawful, as the eighth and fourteenth, 
lunar days, new moon and full moon, and the entrance of the sun into a new 
sign. On these occasions the wise will restrain their appetites, and occupy 
themselves in the worship of the gods, as enjoined by holy writ, in meditation, 
and in prayer; and he who behaves differently will fall into a hell where ordure 
will be his food. Let not a man stimulate his desires by medicines, nor gratify 
them with unnatural objects, or in public or holy places. Let him not think 
incontinently of another's wife, much less address her to that end; for such a man 
will be born in future life as a creeping insect. He who commits adultery is 
punished both here and hereafter; for his days in this world are cut short, and 
when dead he falls into hell. Thus considering, let a man approach his own wife 
in the proper season, or even at other times." 


Footnotes 

01. Sir Wm. Jones renders Achara, 'the immemorial customs of good men' 

r r 

(Manu, II. 6); following the explanation of Kulluka Bhatta, which is 
much the same as that of our text. 'Achara means the use of blankets or 
bark, &c. for dress. Sadhus are pious or just men.' Acharas are, in fact, all 
ceremonial and purificatory observances or practices, not expiatory, 
which are enjoined either by the Vedas or the codes of law. 

02. That is, he may omit prescribed rites, if they are attended with difficulty 
or danger: he may forego ablutions, if they disagree with his health; and 
he may omit pilgrimage to holy shrines, if the way to them is infested by 


robbers. Again, it is injoined in certain ceremonies to eat meat, or drink 
wine; but these practicesare generally reprehended by pious persons, and 
a man may therefore disregard the injunction. 

03. Many of these directions are given by Manu, IV. 45, &c. 

04. That is, wealth is essential to the performance of religious rites, and it is 
also the consequence of performing them. A householder should 
therefore diligently celebrate them, that he may acquire property, and 
thus be enabled to continue to sacrifice. According to Gautama there are 
seven kinds of each of the three sorts of sacrificial rites particularized in 
the text, or those in which the Soma juice, oiled butter, or food are 
presented. Of the latter, according to Manu, there are four varieties, the 
offering of food to the Viswadevas, to spirits, to deceased ancestors, and 
to guests. II. 86. The seven of Gautama are, offerings to progenitors on 
certain eighth days of the fortnight, at the full and change, at Sraddhas 
generally, and to the manes on the full moon of four different months, or 
Sravan, Agrahayaria, Chaitra, and Aswin. 

05. A person may perform his ablutions in his own house, if the weather or 
occupation prevent his going to the water. If he be sick, he may use warm 
water; and if bathing be altogether injurious, he may perform the Mantra 
snana, or repeat the prayers used at ablution, without the actual bath. 

06. The whole series is thus given by Mr. Colebrooke; As. Res. V. 367. 
Triple libations of tila (sesamum seeds) and water are to be given to the 
father, paternal grandfather, and great grandfather; to the mother, 
maternal grandfather, great grandfather, and great great grandfather: and 
single libations are to be offered to the paternal and maternal 
grandmother and great grandmother, to the paternal uncle, brother, son, 
grandson, daughter's son, son-in-law, maternal uncle, sister's son, father's 
sister's son, mother's sister, and other relatives. With exception of those, 
however, offered to his own immediate ancestors, which are obligatory, 
these libations are optional, and are rarely made. 

07. The first part of this prayer is from the Sama-veda, and is given by Mr. 
Colebrooke. As. Res. V. 367. 

08. The rite is not addressed to Brahma specially, but he is to be invoked to 
preside over the oblations offered to the gods and sages subsequently 
particularized. 

09. Kasyapa, the son of Kasyapa, is Aditya, or the sun. Anumati is the 
personified moon, wanting a digit of full. The objects and order of the 


ceremony here succinctly described differ from those of which Mr. 
Colebrooke gives an account (As. Res. VII. 236), and from the form of 
oblations given by Ward (Account of the Hindus, II. 447); but, as 
observed by Mr. Colebrooke, "oblations are made with such ceremonies, 
and in such form, as are adapted to the religious rite which is intended to 
be subsequently performed." As. Res. VII. 237. 

10. See also Manu, III. 84, &c. and the As. Res. VII. 275. 

11. Or this ceremony may be practised instead of the preceding. 

12. This prayer is said by Mr. Colebrooke to be taken from the Purarias (As. 
Res. VII. 275): he translates the last clause, May they who have neither 
food, nor means of obtaining it.' In our text the phrase is ### which the 
commentator explains by ### understanding Anna siddhi to mean 'means 
of dressing food,' Paka sadhana. The following passages of the prayer are 
evidently peculiar to the Vishnu Puraria. 

13. Either fourteen classes of Bhutas or spirits, or the same number of living 
beings, or eight species of divine, one of human, and five of animal 
creatures. 

14. This, according to the commentator, is equal to the fourth part of a 

r 

Ghatika, which, considering the latter synonymous with Muhurtta, or 
one-thirtieth of the day and night, would be twelve minutes. 

15. These precepts, and those which follow, are of the same tenor as those 
given by Manu on the subject of hospitality (III. 99, &c.), but more 
detailed. 

16. By stale, as applied to meat, is intended in this place probably meat 
which has been previously dressed as part of an offering to the gods or 
manes: meat which is dressed in the first instance for an individual being 
prohibited; as by Yajnawalkya: 'Let him avoid flesh killed in vain;' or 
that which is not the residue of an offering to the gods, &c. So also 
Manu, V. 7. 

17. By dried vegetables, &c. is to be understood unboiled vegetables, or 
potherbs dressed without being sprinkled with water: Instead of 'jujubes,' 
the reading is sometimes 'myrobalans:' the other term, ###, is explained 
'sweet-meats.' The construction here, however, is somewhat obscure. 

18. As oil-cake, or the sediment of any thing after expression. 

19. So Manu, II. 101. and IV. 93. 

20. So Manu, IV. 128. 







12. Chapter 


Miscellaneous obligations—purificatory, ceremonial, and moral. 

AURVA continued.—"Let a respectable householder ever venerate the gods, kine, 
Brahmans, saints, aged persons, and holy teachers. Let him observe the two daily 
Sandhyas, and offer oblations to fire. Let him dress in untorn garments, use 
delicate herbs and flowers, wear emeralds and other precious stones, keep his 
hair smooth and neat, scent his person with agreeable perfumes, and always go 
handsomely attired, decorated with garlands of white flowers. Let him never 
appropriate another's property, nor address him with the least unkindness. Let 
him always speak amiably and with truth, and never make public another's 
faults. Let him not desire another's prosperity, nor seek his enmity. Let him not 
mount upon a crazy vehicle, nor take shelter under the bank of a river (which 
may fall upon him). A wise man will not form a friendship nor walk in the same 
path with one who is disesteemed, who is a sinner or a drunkard, who has many 
enemies, or who is lousy, with a harlot or her gallant, with a pauper or a liar, 
with a prodigal, a slanderer, or a knave. Let not a man bathe against the strength 
of a rapid stream, nor enter a house on fire, nor climb to the top of a tree; nor (in 
company) clean his teeth or blow his nose, nor gape without covering his mouth, 
nor clear his throat, nor cough, nor laugh loudly, nor emit wind with noise, nor 
bite his nails, nor cut grass, nor scratch the ground, nor put his beard into his 
mouth, nor crumble a clod of clay; nor look upon the chief planetary bodies 
when he is unclean. Let him not express disgust at a corpse, for the odour of a 
dead body is the produce of the moon. Let a decent man ever avoid by night the 
place where four roads meet, the village tree, the grove adjacent to the place 
where bodies are burnt, and a loose woman. Let him not pass across the shadow 
of a venerable person, of an image, of a deity, of a flag, of a heavenly luminary. 
Let him not travel alone through a forest, nor sleep by himself in an empty 
house. Let him keep remote from hair, bones, thorns, filth, remnants of offerings, 
ashes, chaff, and earth wet with water in which another has bathed. Let him not 
receive the protection of the unworthy, nor attach himself to the dishonest. Let 
him not approach a beast of prey; and let him not tarry long when he has risen 
from sleep. Let him not lie in bed when he is awake, nor encounter fatigue when 
it is time to rest. A prudent man will avoid, even at a distance, animals with tusks 


and horns; and he will shun exposure to frost, to wind, and to sunshine. A man 
must neither bathe, nor sleep, nor rinse his mouth whilst he is naked he must not 
wash his mouth, or perform any sacred rite, with his waistband unfastened: and 
he must not offer oblations to fire, nor sacrifice to the gods, nor wash his mouth, 
nor salute a Brahman, nor utter a prayer, with only one garment on. Let him 
never associate with immoral persons: half an instant is the limit for the 
intercourse of the righteous with them. A wise man will never engage in a 
dispute with either his superiors or inferiors: controversy and marriage are to be 
permitted only between equals. Let not a prudent man enter into contention: let 
him avoid uprofitable enmity. A small loss may be endured; but he should shun 
the wealth that is acquired by hostility. 

"When a man has bathed, he must not wipe his limbs with a towel nor with his 
hands, nor shake his hair, nor rinse his mouth before he has risen. Let him not 
(when sitting) put one foot over another, nor stretch forth his foot, in the 
presence of a superior, but sit with modesty in the posture called Virasana (or on 
his knees). He must never pass round a temple upon his left hand, nor perform 
the ceremony of circumambulating any venerable object in the reverse direction. 
A decent man will not spit, nor eject any impurity, in front of the moon, fire, the 
sun, water, wind, or any respectable person nor will he void urine standing, nor 
upon the highway: he will never step over phlegm, ordure, urine, or blood; nor is 
the expectoration of the mucus of the throat allowable at the time of eating, 
offering sacrifices or oblations, or repeating prayers, or in the presence of a 
respectable person. 

"Let not a man treat women with disrespect, nor let him put entire faith in them. 
Let him not deal impatiently with them, nor set them over matters of importance. 
A man who is attentive to the duties of his station will not go forth from his 
house without saluting the chaplets, flowers, gems, clarified butter, and 
venerable persons in it. At proper seasons he will salute respectfully the places 
where four roads meet, when engaged in offering oblations with fire. Let him 
liberally relieve the virtuous who are poor, and reverence those who are learned 
in the Vedas. He who is a worshipper of the gods and sages, who gives cakes and 
water to the manes, and who exercises hospitality, obtains the highest regions 
after death. He who speaks wisely, moderately, and kindly, goes to those worlds 
which are the inexhaustible sources of happiness. He who is intelligent, modest, 
devout, and who reverences wisdom, his superiors, and the aged, goes to heaven. 



"On the days called Parvas, on periods of impurity, upon unseasonable thunder, 
and the occurrence of eclipses or atmospheric portents, a wise man must desist 
from the study of the Vedas. The pious man who suppresses anger and envy, who 
is benevolent to all, and allays the fears of others, secures, as the least of his 
rewards, enjoyment in Swarga. A man should carry an umbrella, as a defence 
against sun and rain; he should bear a staff when he goes by night, or through a 
wood; and he should walk in shoes, if he desires to keep his body from harm. As 
he goes along he should not look up, nor about him, nor afar off, but keep his 
eyes upon the ground to the extent of a couple of yards. 

"The householder who expels all sources of imperfection is in a great degree 
acquitted of the three ordinary objects of existence, desire, wealth, and virtue; 
sinless amongst the sinful; speaking amicably to all men; his whole soul melting 
with benevolence; final felicity is in his grasp. The earth is upheld by the 
veracity of those who have subdued their passions, and, following righteous 
practices, are never contaminated by desire, covetousness, and wrath. Let 
therefore a wise man ever speak the truth when it is agreeable, and when the 
truth would inflict pain let him hold his peace. Let him not utter that which, 
though acceptable, would be detrimental; for it were better to speak that which 
would be salutary, although it should give exceeding offence. A considerate man 
will always cultivate, in act, thought, and speech, that which is good for living 
beings, both in this world and in the next." 


Footnotes 

01. Manu, IV. 71. "He who breaks clay, or cuts grass, or bites his nails, will 
speedily fall to ruin." 

02. Manu, IV. 130. 

03. Manu, IV. 57. 

04. Ib. id. 78. 

05. Ib. id. 45. 

06. Ib. id. 52. 

07. Manu, IV. 101, &c. The legislator is much more copious on this subject 


than the author of the Purana. 

08. So Manu, IV. 538. "Let him say what is true, but let him say what is 
pleasing. Let him speak no disagreeable truth, nor let him speak 
agreeable falsehood. This is a primeval rule." 

09. That the preceding chapter agrees in many respects very closely with the 
contents of the fourth book of the Institutes of Manu, on economics and 
private morals, will be evident from the instances cited of some of the 
parallel passages. Several others might have been adduced. 




13. Chapter 


Of Sraddhas, or rites in honour of ancestors, to be performed on occasions of 

r r 

rejoicing. Obsequial ceremonies. Of the Ekoddishta or monthly Sraddha, and the 
Sapiridana or annual one. By whom to be performed. 

AURVA continued.--"The bathing of a father without disrobing is enjoined when 
a son is born; and he is to celebrate the ceremony proper for the event, which is 
the Sraddha offered upon joyous occasions. With composed mind, and thinking 
on nothing else, the Brahman should offer worship to both the gods and 
progenitors, and should respectfully circumambulate, keeping Brahmans on his 
left hand, and give them food. Standing with his face to the east, he should 
present, with the parts of the hand sacred to the gods and to Prajapati, balls of 
food, with curds, unbruised grain, and jujubes; and should perform, on every 
accession of good fortune, the rite by which the class of progenitors termed 
Nandimukha is propitiated. A householder should diligently worship the Pitris so 
named, at the marriage of a son or daughter, on entering a new dwelling, on 
giving a name to a child, on performing his tonsure and other purificatory 
ceremonies, at the binding of the mother's hair during gestation, or on first 
seeing the face of a son, or the like. The Sraddha on such occasions, however, 
has been briefly alluded to. Hear now, oh king, the rules for the performance of 
obsequial rites. 

"Having washed the corpse with holy water, decorated it with garlands, and 
burnt it without the village, the kinsmen, having bathed with their clothes on, are 
to stand with their faces to the south, and offer libations to the deceased, 
addressing him by name, and adding, 'wherever thou mayest be.' They then 
return, along with the cattle coming from pasture, to the village; and upon the 
appearance of the stars retire to rest, sleeping on mats spread upon the earth. 
Every day (whilst the mourning lasts) a cake or ball of food is to be placed on 
the ground, as an offering to the deceased; and rice, without flesh, is to be daily 
eaten. Brahmans are to be fed for as many days as the mourner pleases, for the 
soul of the defunct derives satisfaction accordingly as his relatives are content 
with their entertainment. On the first day, or the third, or seventh, or ninth (after 
the death of a person), his kinsmen should change their raiment, and bathe out of 


doors, and offer a libation of water, with (tila) sesamum-seeds. On the fourth day 
the ashes and bones should be collected: after which the body of one connected 
with the deceased by offerings of funeral cakes may be touched (by an 
indifferent person), without thereby incurring impurity; and those who are 
related only by presentation of water are qualified for any occupation. The 
former class of relatives may use beds, but they must still refrain from unguents 
and flowers, and must observe continence, after the ashes and bones have been 
collected (until the mourning is over). When the deceased is a child, or one who 
is abroad, or who has been degraded, or a spiritual preceptor, the period of 
uncleanness is but brief, and the ceremonies with fire and water are discretional. 
The food of a family in which a kinsman is deceased is not to be partaken of for 
ten days and during that period, gifts, acceptance, sacrifice, and sacred study are 
suspended. The term of impurity for a Brahman is ten days; for a Kshatriya, 
twelve; for a Vaisya, half a month; and a whole month for a Sudra. On the first 
day after uncleanness ceases, the nearest relation of the deceased should feed 
Brahmans at his pleasure, but in uneven numbers, and offer to the deceased a 
ball of rice upon holy grass placed near the residue of the food that has been 
eaten. After the guests have been fed, the mourner, according to his caste, is to 
touch water, a weapon, a goad, or a staff, as he is purified by such contact. He 
may then resume the duties prescribed for his caste, and follow the avocation 
ordinarily pursued by its members. 

"The Sraddha enjoined for an individual is to be repeated on the day of his death 
(in each month for a year), but without the prayers and rites performed on the 
first occasion, and without offerings to the Viswadevas. A single ball of food is 
to be offered to the deceased, as the purification of one person, and Brahmans 
are to be fed. The Brahmans are to be asked by the sacrificer if they are satisfied; 
and upon their assent, the prayer, 'May this ever satisfy such a one' (the 
deceased) is to be recited. 

"This is the Sraddha called Ekoddishta, which is to be performed monthly to the 
end of a twelvemonth from the death of a person; at the expiration of which the 
ceremony called Sapiridana is to be observed. The practices of this rite are the 
same as those of the monthly obsequies, but a lustration is to be made with four 
vessels of water, perfumes, and sesamum: one of these vessels is considered as 
dedicated to the deceased, the other three to the progenitors in general; and the 
contents of the former are to be transferred to the other three, by which the 



deceased becomes included in the class of ancestors, to whom worship is to be 
addressed with all the ceremonies of the Sraddha. The persons who are 
competent to perform the obsequies of relations connected by the offering of the 
cake are the son, grandson, great grandson, a kinsman of the deceased, the 
descendants of a brother, or the posterity of one allied by funeral offerings. In 
absence of all these, the ceremony may be instituted by those related by 
presentations of water only, or those connected by offerings of cakes or water to 
maternal ancestors. Should both families in the male line be extinct, the last 
obsequies may be performed by women, or by the associates of the deceased in 
religious or social institutions, or by any one who becomes possessed of the 
property of a deceased kinsman. 

"Obsequial rites are of three descriptions, initiative, intermediate, and 
subsequent. The first are those which are observed after the burning of the 
corpse until the touching of water, weapons, &c. (or until the cessation of 

r 

uncleanness). The intermediate ceremonies are the Sraddhas called Ekoddishta, 
which are offered every month: and the subsequent rites are those which follow 
the Sapiridikararia, when the deceased is admitted amongst the ancestors of his 
race; and the ceremonies are thenceforth general or ancestral. The first set of 
rites (as essential) are to be performed by the kindred of the father or mother, 
whether connected by the offering of the cake or of water, by the associates of 
the deceased, or by the prince who inherits his property. The first and the last 
rites are both to be performed by sons and other relations, and by daughter's 
sons, and their sons; and so are the sacrifices on the day of the person's death. 
The last class, or ancestral rites, are to be performed annually, with the same 
ceremonies as are enjoined for the monthly obsequies; and they may be also 
performed by females. As the ancestral rights are therefore most universal, I will 
describe to you, oh king, at what seasons, and in what manner, they should be 
celebrated." 




Footnotes 

01. The offerings of the Hindus to the Pitris partake of the character of those 
of the Romans to the lares and manes, but bear a more conspicuous part 


in their ritual. They are said indeed by Manu (III. 203), in words repeated 
in the Vayu and Matsya Purarias and Hari Vansa, to be of more moment 
than the worship of the gods: These ceremonies are not to be regarded as 
merely obsequial; for independently of the rites addressed to a recently 
deceased relative, and in connexion with him to remote ancestors and to 
the progenitors of all beings, which are of a strictly obsequial or funereal 
description, offerings to deceased ancestors, and the Pitris in general, 
form an essential ceremony on a great variety of festive and domestic 
occasions. The Nirnaya Sindhu, in a passage referred to by Mr. 
Colebrooke (As. Res. VII.), specifies the following Sraddhas: 1. The 
Nitya, or perpetual; daily offerings to ancestors in general: 2. The 
Naimittika, or occasional; as the Ekoddishta,or obsequial offerings on 
account of a kinsman recently deceased: 3. The Kamya, voluntary; 
performed for the accomplishment of a special design: 4. The Vriddhi; 
performed on occasions of rejoicing or prosperity: 5. The Sapindana; 
offerings to all individual and to general ancestors: 6. The Parvana 
Sraddha; offerings to the manes on certain lunar days called Parvas, or 
day of full moon and new moon, and the eighth and fourteenth days of 
the lunar fortnight: 7. The Goshthi; for the advantage of a number of 
learned persons, or of an assembly of Brahmans, invited for the purpose: 
8. The Suddhi; one performed to purify a person from some defilement; 
an expiatory Sraddha: 9. The Karmanga; one forming part of the 
initiatory ceremonies, or Sanskaras, observed at conception, birth, 
tonsure, &c.: 10. The Daiva; to which the gods are invited: 11. The Yatra 
Sraddha; held by a person going a journey: and 12. The Pushti Sraddha; 
one performed to promote health and wealth. Of these, the four which are 
considered the most solemn are the rite performed for a parent, or near 
relative, lately deceased; that which is performed for kindred 
collectively; that observed on certain lunar days; and that celebrated on 
occasions of rejoicing. Nirnaya Sindhu. 

02. Manu directs the balls to be made from the remainder of the clarified 
butter constituting the previous oblation to the gods. III. 215. Kulluka 

r r 

Bhatta explains, however, the oblation to consist partly of Anna food, or 
boiled rice. The latter is the article of which the balls chiefly consist. 
Yajnawalkya directs them to be made of rice and sesamum-seeds. The 
Vayu P. adds to these two ingredients, honey and butter: but various 
kinds of fruit, of pulse, and of grain, and water, frankincense, sugar, and 


milk, are also mixed up in the Pindas. Their size also differs; and 
according to Angiras, as quoted by Hemadri in the Sraddha Mayukha, 
they may be of the dimension of the fruit of the jujube, or of the hog- 
plum, of the fruit of the Bel, or of the wood-apple, or of a fowl's egg. 
Some authorities direct Pindas of a different size for different Sraddhas; 
prescribing them no larger than the wood-apple at the first or pure 
funereal ceremony, and as big as a cocoa-nut at the monthly and annual 

r r 

Sraddha. In practice the Pinda is usually of such a magnitude that it may 
be conveniently held by the hand. 

03. We have here the authority of the text for classing the Nandimukhas 
amongst the Pitris : the verse is ###, and the same Gana or class is 
presently again named: ### The Mantra of the Vriddhi or festival 
Sraddha is also said, in the Nirnaya Sindhu, to be ###. According to the 
authorities, however, which are cited in that work, there seems to be 
some uncertainty about the character of the Nandimukhas; and they are 
addressed both as Pitris and gods: being in the former case either the 
ancestors prior to the great grandfather, ancestors collectively, or a 
certain class of them; and in the latter, being identified with the 
Viswadevas, or a class of them called also Urddhavaktra. The term 
Nandimukha is also applied to the rite itself, or to the Vriddhi Sraddha, 
and to one addressed to maternal ancestors. Nirnaya Sindhu, &c. 

04. "An oblation of water must be next presented from the joined palms of 
the hand, naming the deceased and the family from which he sprang, and 
saying, 'May this oblation reach thee.'" As. Res. VII. 244. The text has, 
###. 

05. The proper period of mourning is ten days, on each of which offerings of 
cakes, and libations of water, are to be made to the deceased, augmenting 
the number of cakes each day, so that on the last day ten cakes are 
presented. When the period is shorter, the same number of ten cakes must 
be distributed amongst the several days, or they may be all presented on 
one day. Nirnaya Sindhu. 

06. It should be, more correctly, on that day on which the mourning ceases, 
or, as previously mentioned, the first, third, seventh, or ninth; but the 
authorities vary, and, besides these, the second and fourth days, and 
certain days of the fortnight or month, are specified. Nirnaya Sindhu,. 

07. They are no longer unclean. The Sapindas, or those connected by 
offerings of cakes to common ancestors, extend to seven degrees, 





ascending or descending. The Samanodakas, or those similarly connected 
by presentations of water, to fourteen degrees. 

08. That is, a mere guest or stranger is not to partake of it. The food directed 
to be given to Brahmans is given in general only to the relatives of the 
deceased, who are already unclean. In this respect our text and the 
modern practice seem to differ from the primitive system, as described 
by Manu, III. 187. The eleventh or twelfth day is the term on which the 
Sraddha which crowns the whole of the funeral rites is to be performed, 
and when Brahmans are to be invited. Nirnaya Sindhu. 

09. The number of Piridas, however, is for each case the same, or ten. 
Nirnaya Sindhu. 

10. So Manu, III. 251. It may be doubted if the monthly Sraddha was part of 

r r 

the ancient system, although Kulluka Bhatta supposes it to be referred to 
(v. 548), and supplies the fancied omission of the text. 

11. Purva, 'first;' Madhyama, 'middle;' and Uttara, 'last.' 




14. Chapter 


Of occasional Sraddhas, or obsequial ceremonies: when most efficacious, and at 

what places. 

AURVA proceeded.—"Let the devout performer of an ancestral oblation 
propitiate Brahma, Indra, Rudra, the Aswins, the sun, fire, the Vasus, the winds, 
the Viswadevas, the sages, birds, men, animals, reptiles, progenitors, and all 
existent things, by offering adoration to them monthly, on the fifteenth day of the 
moon's wane (or dark fortnight), or on the eighth day of the same period in 
certain months, or at particular seasons, as I will explain. 

"When a householder finds that any circumstance has occurred, or a 
distinguished guest has arrived, on which account ancestral ceremonies are 
appropriate, the should celebrate them. He should offer a voluntary sacrifice 
upon any atmospheric portent, at the equinoctial and solstitial periods, at eclipses 
of the sun and moon, on the sun's entrance into a zodiacal sign, upon 
unpropitious aspects of the planets and asterisms, on dreaming unlucky dreams, 
and on eating the grain of the year's harvest. The Pitris derive satisfaction for 
eight years from ancestral offerings upon the day of new moon when the star of 
the conjunction is Anuradha, Visakha, or Swati; and for twelve years when it is 
Pushya, Ardra, or Punarvasu. It is not easy for a man to effect his object, who is 
desirous of worshipping the Pitris or the gods on a day of new moon when the 
stars are those of Dhanishtha, Purvabhadrapada, or Satabhisha. Hear also an 
account of another class of Sraddhas, which afford especial contentment to 
progenitors, as explained by Sanatkumara, the son of Brahma, to the 
magnanimous Pururavas, when full of faith and devotion to the Pitris he inquired 
how he might please them. The third lunar day of the month Vaisakha (April, 
May), and the ninth of Kartika (October, November), in the light fortnight; the 
thirteenth of Nabha (July, August), and the fifteenth of Magha (January, 
February), in the dark fortnight; are called by ancient teachers the anniversaries 
of the first day of a Yuga, or age (Yugadya), and are esteemed most sacred. On 
these days, water mixed with sesamum-seeds should be regularly presented to 
the progenitors of mankind; as well as on every solar and lunar eclipse; on the 
eighth lunations of the dark fortnights of Agrahayaria, Magha, and Phalguna 


(December—February); on the two days commencing the solstices, when the 
nights and days alternately begin to diminish; on those days which are the 
anniversaries of the beginning of the Manwantaras; when the sun is in the path 
of the goat; and on all occurrences of meteoric phenomena. A Sraddha at these 
seasons contents the Pitris for a thousand years: such is the secret which they 
have imparted. The fifteenth day of the dark half of the month Magha, when 
united with the conjunction of the asterism over which Varuria presides 
(Satabhisha), is a season of no little sanctity, when offerings are especially 
grateful to the progenitors. Food and water presented by men who are of 

r 

respectable families, when the asterism Dhanishtha is combined with the day of 
new moon, content the Pitris for ten thousand years; whilst they repose for a 
whole age when satisfied by offerings made on the day of new moon when 
Ardra is the lunar mansion. 

"He who, after having offered food and libations to the Pitris, bathes in the 
Ganges, Satlaj, Vipasa (Beyah), Saraswati, or the Gomati at Naimisha, expiates 
all his sins. The Pitris also say, 'After having received satisfaction for a 
twelvemonth, we shall further derive gratification by libations offered by our 
descendants at some place of pilgrimage, at the end of the dark fortnight of 
Magha.' The songs of the Pitris confer purity of heart, integrity of wealth, 
prosperous seasons, perfect rites, and devout faith; all that men can desire. Hear 
the verses that constitute those songs, by listening to which all those advantages 
will be secured, oh prince, by you. 'That enlightened individual who begrudges 
not his wealth, but presents us with cakes, shall be born in a distinguished 
family. Prosperous and affluent shall that man ever be, who in honour of us gives 
to the Brahmans, if he is wealthy, jewels, clothes, land, conveyances, wealth, or 
any valuable presents; or who, with faith and humility, entertains them with 
food, according to his means, at proper seasons. If he cannot afford to give them 
dressed food, he must, in proportion to his ability, present them with unboiled 
grain, or such gifts, however trifling, as he can bestow. Should he be utterly 
unable even to do this, he must give to some eminent Brahman, bowing at the 
same time before him, sesamum-seeds adhering to the tips of his fingers, and 
sprinkle water to us, from the palms of his hands, upon the ground; or he must 
gather, as he may, fodder for a day, and give it to a cow; by which he will, if firm 
in faith, yield us satisfaction. If nothing of this kind is practicable, he must go to 
a forest, and lift up his arms to the sun and other regents of the spheres, and say 
aloud—I have no money, nor property, nor grain, nor any thing whatever it for an 



ancestral offering. Bowing therefore to my ancestors, I hope the progenitors will 
be satisfied with these arms tossed up in the air in devotion.' These are the words 
of the Pitris themselves; and he who endeavours, with such means as he may 
possess, to fulfil their wishes, performs the ancestral rite called a Sraddha." 


Footnotes 

01. We may here take the opportunity of inquiring who are meant by the 
Pitris; and, generally speaking, they may be called a race of divine 
beings, inhabiting celestial regions of their own, and receiving into their 
society the spirits of those mortals for whom the rite of fellowship in 
obsequial cakes with them, the Sapindikarana, has been duly performed. 
The Pitris collectively, therefore, include a man's ancestors; but the 
principal members of this order of beings are of a different origin. The 
Vayu, Matsya, and Padma Pur anas, and Hari Vansa, profess to give an 
account of the original Pitris. The account is much the same, and for the 
most part in the same words, in all. They agree in distinguishing the Pitris 
into seven classes; three of which are without form, or composed of 
intellectual, not elementary substance, and assuming what forms they 
please; and four are corporeal. When they come to the enumeration of the 
particular classes they somewhat differ, and the accounts in all the works 
are singularly imperfect. According to a legend given by the Vayu and 
the Hari Vansa, the first Pitris were the sons of the gods. The gods having 
offended Brahma, by neglecting to worship him, were cursed by him to 
become fools; but upon their repentance he directed them to apply to 
their sons for instruction. Being taught accordingly the rites of expiation 
and penance by their sons, they addressed them as fathers; whence the 
sons of the gods were the first Pitris. So the Matsya has 'The Pitris are 
born in the Manwantaras as the sons of the gods.' The Hari Vansa makes 
the sons assume the character of fathers, addressing them, 'Depart, 
children.' Again; the Vayu P. declares the seven orders of Pitris to have 
been originally the first gods, the Vairajas, whom Brahma, with the eye 
of Yoga, beheld in the eternal spheres, and who are the gods of the gods. 
Again; in the same work we have the incorporeal Pitris called Vairajas, 


from being the sons of the Prajapati Viraja. The Matsya agrees with this 
latter statement, and adds that the gods worship them. The Hari Vansa 
has the same statement, but more precisely distinguishes the Vairajas as 
one class only of the incorporeal Pitris. The commentator states the same, 
calling the three incorporeal Pitris, Vairajas, Agnishwattas, and 
Varhishads; and the four corporeal orders, Sukalas, Angirasas, 
Suswadhas, and Somapas. The Vairajas are described as the fathers of 
Mena, the mother of Uma. Their abode is variously termed the Santanika, 
Sanatana, and Soma loka. As the posterity of Viraja, they are the 
Somasads of Manu. The other classes of Pitris the three Purarias agree 
with Manu in representing as the sons of the patriarchs, and in general 
assign to them the same offices and posterity. They are the following:— 

Agnishwattas—sons of Marichi, and Pitris of the gods (Manu, Matsya, 
Padma): living in Soma-loka, and parents of Achchoda (Matsya, Padma, 
Hari Vansa). The Vayu makes them residents of Viraja-loka, sons of 
Pulastya, Pitris of the demigods and demons, and parents of Pivari; 
omitting the next order of Pitris, to whom these circumstances more 
accurately refer. The commentator on the Hari V. derives the name from 
Agnishu, 'in or by oblations to fire,' and Atta, 'obtained,' 'invoked.' 

Varhishads—sons of Atri, and Pitris of the demons (Manu): sons of 
Pulastya, Pitris of the demons, residents in Vaibhraja, fathers of Pivari 
(Matsya, Padma, Hari V.). 

These three are the formless or incorporeal Pitris. 

Somapas—descendants of Bhrigu, or sons of Kavi by Swadha, the 
daughter of Agni; and Pitris of the Brahmans (Manu and Vayu P.). The 
Padma calls them Ushmapas. The Hari V. calls the Somapas, to whom it 
ascribes the same descent as the Vayu, the Pitris of the Sudras; and the 
Sukalas the Pitris of the Brahmans. 

Havishmantas—in the solar sphere, sons of Angiras, and Pitris of the 
Kshatriyas (Manu, Vayu, Matsya, Padma, Hari Vansa). 

Ajyapas—sons of Kardama, Pitris of the Vaisyas, in the Kamaduha-loka 


(Manu, &c.); but the lawgiver calls them the sons of Pulastya. The Pitris 
of the Vaisyas are called Kavyas in the Nandi Upapurana; and in the Hari 
Vansa and its comment they are termed Suswadhas, sons of Kardama, 
descended from Pulaha. 

r r 

Sukalins—sons of Vasishtha, and Pitris of the Sudras (Manu and Vayu P.). 
They are not mentioned in the Padma. The Matsya inserts the name and 
descent, but specifies them as amongst the incorporeal Pitris. It may be 
suspected that the passage is corrupt. The Hari Vansa makes the Sukalas 
sons of Vasishtha, the Pitris of the Brahmans; and gives the title of 
Somapas to the Pitris of the Sudras. In general this work follows the 
Vayu; but with omissions and transpositions, as if it had carelessly 
mutilated its original. 

Besides these Pitris or progenitors, other heavenly beings are sometimes 
made to adopt a similar character: thus Manu says, "The wise call our 
fathers Vasus; our paternal grandfathers, Rudras; our paternal great 
grandfathers, Adityas; agreeably to a text of the Vedas:" that is, these 
divine beings are to be meditated upon along with, and as not distinct 
from, progenitors. Hemadri quotes the Nandi Upapurana for a different 
practice, and directs Vishnu to be identified with the father, Brahma with 
the grandfather, and Siva with the great grandfather. This, however, is 
Saiva innovation. The Vaishriavas direct Aniruddha to be regarded as 
one's-self, and Pradyumna, Sankarsharia, and Vasudeva as the three 
ancestors. Again, they are identified with Varuria, Prajapatya, and Agni; 
or, again, with months, seasons, and years. Nirriaya Sindhu. It may be 
doubted how far any of these correctly represent the original notions 
inculcated by the texts of the Vedas, from which, in the most essential 
particulars, they are derived. 

02. When the Yogatara, or principal star seen, is the chief star or stars of 
these asterisms or lunar mansions respectively, see the table given by Mr. 
Colebrooke: As. Res. IX. The first three named in the text are stars in 
Scorpio, Libra, and Arcturus: the second three are stars in Cancer, 
Gemini, and Orion: and the third are stars in the Dolphin, Pegasus, and 
Aquarius. 





15. Chapter 


What Brahmans are to be entertained at Sraddhas. Different prayers to be 
recited. Offerings of food to be presented to deceased ancestors. 

AURVA proceeded.—"Hear next, oh prince, what description of Brahman should 
be fed at ancestral ceremonies, he should be one studied in various triplets of the 
Rich and Yajur Vedas one who is acquainted with the six supplementary sciences 
of the Vedas one who understands the Vedas; one who practises the duties they 
enjoin one who exercises penance; a chanter of the principal Sama-veda, an 
officiating priest, a sister's son, a daughter's son, a son-in-law, a father-in-law, a 
maternal uncle, an ascetic, a Brahman who maintains the five fires, a pupil, a 
kinsman; one who reverences his parents. A man should first employ the 
Brahmans first specified in the principal obsequial rite; and the others 
(commencing with the ministering priest) in the subsidiary ceremonies instituted 
to gratify his ancestors. 

"A false friend, a man with ugly nails or black teeth, a ravisher, a Brahman who 
neglects the service of fire and sacred study, a vender of the Soma plant, a man 
accused of any crime, a thief, a calumniator, a Brahman who conducts religious 
ceremonies for the vulgar; one who instructs his servant in holy writ, or is 
instructed in it by his servant; the husband of a woman who has been formerly 
betrothed to another; a man who is undutiful to his parents; the protector of the 
husband of a woman of the servile caste, or the husband of a woman of the 
servile caste; and a Brahman who ministers to idols—are not proper persons to be 
invited to au ancestral offering. On the first day let a judicious man invite 
eminent teachers of the Vedas, and other Brahmans; and according to their 
directions determine what is to be dedicated to the gods, and what to the Pitris. 
Associated with the Brahmans, let the institutor of an obsequial rite abstain from 
anger and incontinence. He who having eaten himself in a Sraddha, and fed 
Brahmans, and appointed them to their sacred offices, is guilty of incontinence, 
thereby sentences his progenitors to shameful suffering. In the first place, the 
Brahmans before described are to be invited; but those holy men who come to 
the house without an invitation are also to be entertained. The guests are to be 
reverently received with water for their feet, and the like; and the entertainer, 


holding holy grass in his hand, is to place them, after they have rinsed their 
mouths, upon seats. An uneven number of Brahmans is to be invited in sacrifices 
to the manes; an even or uneven number in those presented to the gods; or one 
only on each occasion. 

"Then let the householder, inspired by religious faith, offer oblations to the 
maternal grandfather, along with the worship of the Viswadevas, or the 
ceremony called Vaiswadeva, which comprehends offerings to both paternal and 
maternal ancestors, and to ancestors in general. Let him feed the Brahmans who 
are appropriated to the gods, and to maternal ancestors, with their faces to the 
north; and those set apart for the paternal ancestors, and ancestors in general, 
with their faces to the east. Some say that the viands of the Sraddha should be 
kept distinct for these two sets of ancestors, but others maintain that they are to 
be fed with the same food, at the same time. Having spread Kusa grass for seats, 
and offered libations according to rule, let the sensible man invoke the deities, 
with the concurrence of the Brahmans who are present. Let the man who is 
acquainted with the ritual offer a libation to the gods with water and barley, 
having presented to them flowers, perfumes, and incense. Let him offer the same 
to the Pitris, placed upon his left; and with the consent of the Brahmans, having 
first provided seats of Kusa grass doubled, let him invoke with the usual prayers 
the manes to the ceremony, offering a libation, on his left hand, of water and 
sesamum. He will then, with the permission of the Brahmans, give food to any 
guest who arrives at the time, or who is desirous of victuals, or who is passing 
along the road; for holy saints and ascetics, benefactors of mankind, are 
traversing this earth, disguised in various shapes. On this account let a prudent 
man welcome a person who arrives at such a season; for inattention to a guest 
frustrates the consequences of an ancestral offering. 

"The sacrificer is then to offer food, without salt or seasoning, to fire, three 
several times, with the consent of the assistant Brahmans; exclaiming first, 'To 
fire, the vehicle of the oblations; to the manes Swaha!' Next addressing the 
oblation to Soma, the lord of the progenitors; and giving the third to Vaivaswata. 
He is then to place a very little of the residue of the oblation in the dishes of the 
Brahmans; and next, presenting them with choice viands, well dressed and 
seasoned, and abundant, he is to request them civilly to partake of it at their 
pleasure. The Brahmans are to eat of such food attentively, in silence, with 
cheerful countenances, and at their ease. The sacrificer is to give it to them, not 



churlishly, nor hurriedly, but with devout faith. 


"Having next recited the prayer for the discomfiture of malignant spirits, and 
scattered sesamum-seeds upon the ground, the Brahmans who have been fed are 
to be addressed, in common with the ancestors of the sacrificer, in this manner: 
'May my father, grandfather, and great grandfather, in the persons of these 
Brahmans, receive satisfaction! May my father, grandfather, and great 
grandfather derive nutriment from these oblations to fire! May my father, 
grandfather, and great grandfather derive satisfaction from the balls of food 
placed by me upon the ground! May my father, grandfather, and great 
grandfather be pleased with what I have this day offered them in faith! May my 
maternal grandfather, his father, and his father, also enjoy contentment from my 
offerings! May all the gods experience gratification, and all evil beings perish! 
May the lord of sacrifice, the imperishable deity Hari, be the acceptor of all 
oblations made to the manes or the gods! and may all malignant spirits, and 
enemies of the deities, depart from the rite.' 

"When the Brahmans have eaten sufficiently, the worshipper must scatter some 
of the food upon the ground, and present them individually with water to rinse 
their mouths; then, with their assent, he may place upon the ground balls made 
up of boiled rice and condiments, along with sesamum-seeds. With the part of 
his hand sacred to the manes he must offer sesamum-seeds, and water from his 
joined palms; and with the same part of his hand he must present cakes to his 
maternal ancestors. He should in lonely places, naturally beautiful, and by the 
side of sacred streams, diligently make presents (to the manes and the 
Brahmans). Upon Kusa grass, the tips of which are pointed to the south, and 
lying near the fragments of the meat, let the householder present the first ball of 
food, consecrated with flowers and incense, to his father; the second to his 
grandfather; and the third to his great grandfather; and let him satisfy those who 
are contented with the wipings of his hand, by wiping it with the roots of Kusa 
grass. After presenting balls of food to his maternal ancestors in the same 
manner, accompanied by perfumes and incense, he is to give to the principal 
Brahmans water to rinse their mouths; and then, with attention and piety, he is to 
give the Brahmans gifts, according to his power, soliciting their benedictions, 
accompanied with the exclamation 'Swadha!' Having made presents to the 
Brahmans, he is to address himself to the gods, saying, May they who are the 
Viswadevas be pleased with this oblation!' Having thus said, and the blessings to 



be solicited having been granted by the Brahmans, he is to dismiss first the 
paternal ancestors, and then the gods. The order is the same with the maternal 
ancestors and the gods in respect to food, donation, and dismissal. Commencing 
with the washing of the feet, until the dismissing of the gods and Brahmans, the 
ceremonies are to be performed first for paternal ancestors, and then for 
ancestors on the mother's side. Let him dismiss the Brahmans with kindly 
speeches and profound respect, and attend upon them at the end of the Sraddha; 
until permitted by them to return. The wise man will then perform the invariable 
worship of the Viswadevas, and take' his own meal along with his friends, his 
kinsmen, and his dependants. 

"In this manner an enlightened householder will celebrate the obsequial worship 
of his paternal and maternal ancestors, who, satisfied by his offerings, will grant 
him all his desires. Three things are held pure at obsequies, a daughter's son, a 
Nepal blanket, and sesamum-seeds and the gift, or naming, or sight of silver is 
also propitious. The person offering a Sraddha should avoid anger, walking 
about, and hurry; these three things are very objectionable. The Viswadevas, and 
paternal and maternal ancestors, and the living members of a man's family are all 
nourished by the offerer of ancestral oblations. 

"The class of Pitris derives support from the moon, and the moon is sustained by 
acts of austere devotion. Hence the appointment of one who practises austerities 
is most desirable. A Yogi set before a thousand Brahmans enables the institutor 
of obsequial rites to enjoy all his desires." 


Footnotes 

01. The Brahmans here particularized are termed Trinachiketa, Trimadhu, 
and Trisuparria; and are so denominated, according to the commentator, 
from particular parts of the Vedas. The first is so called from studying or 
reciting three Anuvakas of the Kathaka branch of the Yajur-veda, 
commencing with the term Trinachiketa; the second, from three 
Anuvakas of the same Veda, beginning Madhuvata, &c.; and the third, 
from a similar portion, commencing Brahmavan namami. The first and 


r r 

third terms occur in Manu, III. 185; and Kulluka Bhatta explains 
Trinachiketa to mean a portion of the Yajur-veda, and the Brahman who 
studies it; and Trisuparna, a part of the Rich, and the Brahman who is 
acquainted with it. The Nirnaya Sindhu explains the terms m a like 
manner, but calls the Trisuparna, as well as the Trinachiketa prayers, 
portions of the Yajush. The Trimadhu it assigns to the Rich. Other 
explanations are also given to the terms Trinachiketa and Trisuparna: the 
first being explained a Brahman who thrice performs the ceremony called 
Chayana; and the last, one who, after the seven ascending generations, 
worships the Pitris termed Somapas. These explanations are however 
considered less correct than the preceding, and which are thus given in 
the authority cited: ###. 

02. For the six Angas. 

03. So the commentator distinguishes the Vedavit, the Brahman who 
understands the meaning of the text of the Vedas, from the Srotriya, who 
practises the rites he studies. 

r r 

04. Portions of the Saman contained in the Aranyaka are called the Jyeshtha, 
'elder' or 'principal' Saman. 

05. Manu, III. 150, &c. 

06. As two or five at a ceremony dedicated to the gods; three at the worship 
of the Pitris. Nirnaya Sindhu. 

07. The worship of the Viswadevas forms a part of the general Sraddhas, and 
of the daily sacrifices of the householder. According to the Vayu this was 
a privilege conferred upon them by Brahma and the Pitris, as a reward for 
religious austerities practised by them upon Himalaya. Their introduction 
as a specific class seems to have originated in the custom of sacrificing to 
the gods collectively, or to all the gods, as the name Viswadevas implies. 
They appear, however, as a distinct class in the Vedas, and their 
assumption of this character is therefore of ancient date. The daily 
offering to them is noticed by Manu, III. 90, 172; and offerings to 'the 
gods' are also enjoined at the beginning and end of a Sraddha. Kulluka 

r r 

Bhatta understands here the Viswadevas, and it probably is so; but in 
another verse different divinities are specified: "First having satisfied 
Agni, Soma, Yama, with clarified butter, let him proceed to satisfy the 
manes of his progenitors." v. 211. Manu also directs them to be 
worshipped first and last in order. See As. Res. VII. 265, 271, &c. 

08. The text is 'with their assent;' but no noun occurs in the sentence with 



which the relative is connected. It must mean the Brahmans, however, as 
in this passage of Vriddha Par tiara; 'Let the sacrificer place his left hand 
on the Brahman's right knee, and say, "Shall I invoke the Viswadevas?" 
and being desired to invoke them, let him address them with the two 
Mantras, "Viswadevas, he is come! Viswadevas, hear him!"' 

09. This notion occurs more than once in the Vayu, in nearly the same 
words. 

10. This places the initiatory oblations noticed by Manu (see note 7) 
subsequent to the offerings to the Viswadevas. 

11. The Rakshoghna Mantra: the extinguishing of a lamp, lighted to keep off 
evil spirits, which is accompanied by a Mantra, or prayer. As. Res. VII. 
274. 

12. Part of this passage is in the words of Manu, III. 207. It is omitted in the 
MSS. in the Bengali character. 

13. Manu, III. 296. 

14. "Then let the Brahmans address him, saying, 'Swadha!' for in all 
ceremonies relating to deceased ancestors, the word Swadha is the 
highest benison." Manu, III. 252. 

15. We have here the words of Manu; III. 235. Three things are held pure at 
such obsequies, the daughter's son, the Nepal blanket, and sesamum- 
seed.' Sir Wm. Jones's translation of these terms rests upon the 
explanation of Kulluka Bhatta of this and the verse preceding; 'Let him 
give his daughter's son, though a religious student, food at a Sraddha, and 
the blanket for a seat.' The commentator on our text says that some 
understand by Dauhitra, clarified butter made from the milk of a cow fed 
with grass gathered on the day of new moon; and some explain it a plate 
or dish of buffalo horn. Kutapa he interprets by Ashtama Muhurtta, the 
eighth hour of the day, or a little after noon, although he admits that some 
render it a blanket made of goats' wool. These explanations are also 
noticed in the Nirriaya Sindhu and, upon the authority of the Matsya P., 
Kutapa is said to mean eight things; which equally consume (Tapa) all 
sin (Ku), or noon, a vessel of rhinoceros' horn, a nepal blanket, silver, 
holy grass, sesamum, kine, and a daughter's son. 

16. So the Matsya P. has 'the gift, sight, and name of silver are desired.' The 
notion originates with Manu, III. 202. 

17. The same doctrine is inculcated by the Vayu P.; but it appears to be a 
Pauranik innovation, for Manu places the Brahman intent on scriptural 


knowledge and on austere devotion on a level, and makes no mention of 
the Yogi. Ill, 134. 




16. Chapter 


Things proper to be offered as food to deceased ancestors: prohibited things. 
Circumstances vitiating a Sraddha: how to be avoided. Song of the Pitris, or 
progenitors, heard by Ikshwaku. 

AURVA continued.—"Ancestors are satisfied for a month with offerings of rice 
or other grain, with clarified butter, with fish, or the flesh of the hare, of birds, of 
the hog, the goat, the antelope, the deer, the gayal, or the sheep, or with the milk 
of the cow, and its products. They are for ever satisfied with flesh (in general), 
and with that of the long-eared white goat in particular. The flesh of the 
rhinoceros, the Kalasaka potherb, and honey, are also especial sources of 
satisfaction to those worshipped at ancestral ceremonies. The birth of that man is 
the occasion of satisfaction to his progenitors who performs at the due time their 
obsequial rites at Gaya. Grains that spring up spontaneously, rice growing wild, 
Panic of both species (white or black), vegetables that grow in forests, are fit for 
ancestral oblations; as are barley, wheat, rice, sesamum, various kinds of pulse, 
and mustard. On the other hand, a householder must not offer any kind of grain 
that is not consecrated by religious ceremonies on its first coming into season; 
nor the pulse called Rajamasha, nor millet, nor lentils, nor gourds, nor garlick, 
nor onions, nor nightshade, nor camels' thorn, nor salt, nor the efflorescence of 
salt deserts, nor red vegetable extracts, nor any thing that looks like salt, nor any 
thing that is not commendable; nor is water fit to be offered at a Sraddha that has 
been brought by night, or has been abandoned, or is so little as not to satisfy a 
cow, or smells badly, or is covered with froth. The milk of animals with 
undivided hoofs, of a camel, a ewe, a deer, or a buffalo, is unfit for ancestral 
oblations. If an obsequial rite is looked at by a eunuch, a man ejected from 
society, an outcast, a heretic, a drunken man, or one diseased, by a cock, a naked 
ascetic, a monkey, a village hag, by a woman in her courses or pregnant, by an 
unclean person, or by a carrier of corpses, neither gods nor progenitors will 
partake of the food. The ceremony should therefore be performed in a spot 
carefully enclosed. Let the performer cast sesamum on the ground, and drive 
away malignant spirits. Let him not give food that is fetid, or vitiated by hairs or 
insects, or mixed with acid gruel, or stale. Whatever suitable food is presented 
with pure faith, and with the enunciation of name and race, to ancestors, at an 


obsequial oblation, becomes food to them (or gives them nourishment). In 
former times, O king of the earth! this song of the Pitris was heard by Ikshwaku, 
the son of Manu, in the groves of Kalapa (on the skirts of the Himalaya 
mountains): 'Those of our descendants shall follow a righteous path who shall 
reverently present us with cakes at Gaya. May he be born in our race who shall 
give us, on the thirteenth of Bhadrapada and Magha, milk, honey, and clarified 
butter; or when he marries a maiden, or liberates a black bull, or performs any 
domestic ceremony agreeable to rule, accompanied by donations to the 
Brahmans!" 




Footnotes 

01. See Manu, III. 266, &c. The articles are much the same; the periods of 
satisfaction somewhat vary. 

02. The expression Gavya implies all that is derived from a cow, but in the 
text it is associated with 'flesh;' and, as the commentator observes, some 
consider the flesh of the cow to be here intended: but this, he adds, 
relates to other ages. In the Kali or present age it implies milk and 
preparations of milk, The sacrifice of a cow or calf formed part of the 
ancient Sraddha. It then became typical, or a bull was turned loose, 
instead of being slaughtered; and this is still practised on some occasions. 
In Manu, the term Gavya is coupled with others, which limit its 
application: 'A whole year with the milk of cows, and food made of that 
milk.' III. 272. 

03. Nagna is literally 'naked,' but, as explained in the following chapter, 
means a Jain mendicant. No such person is included by Manu (III. 239, 
&c.) amongst those who defile a Sraddha by looking upon it. The Vayu 
contains the same prohibition. 

04. Nila vrisha; but this animal is not altogether or always black. In the 
Brahma P., as quoted in the Nirriaya Sindhu, it is said to be of a red 
colour, with light face and tail, and white hoofs and horns; or a white 
bull, with black face, &c.; or a black bull, with white face, tail, and feet. 

05. Very full descriptions of the Sraddha occur in almost all the Purarias, 
especially in the Vayu, Kurma, Markarideya, Vamana, and Garuda. The 


r r r 

Matsya and Padma (Srishthi Kharida) contain descriptions which are 
much the same as that of the Vayu. The accounts of the Brahma, Agni, 
and Varaha are less full and regular than in some of the others; and in 
none of them is the subject so fully and perspicuously treated as in our 
text. For satisfactory information, however, the Sraddha Mayukha and 
the Nirnaya Sindhu should be consulted. 




17. Chapter 


Of heretics, or those who reject the authority of the Vedas: their origin, as 
described by Vasishtha to Bhishma: the gods, defeated by the Daityas, praise 
Vishnu: an illusory being, or Buddha, produced from his body. 

PARASARA.—Thus, in former days, spake the holy Aurva to the illustrious 
monarch Sagara, when he inquired concerning the usages proper to be practised 
by mankind; and thus I have explained to you the whole of those observances 
against which no one ought to transgress. 

MAITREYA.—You have told me, venerable sir, that an ancestral rite is not to be 
looked upon by certain persons, amongst whom you mentioned such as were 
apostates. I am desirous to learn whom you intended by that appellation; what 
practices bestow such a title upon a man; and what is the character of the 
individual to whom you alluded. 

PARASARA.— 1 The Rig, Yajur, and Sanaa Vedas constitute the triple covering of 
the several castes, and the sinner who throws this off is said to be naked (or 
apostate). The three Vedas are the raiment of all the orders of men, and when that 
is discarded they are left bare. On this subject hear what I heard my grandfather, 
the pious Vasishtha, relate to the magnanimous Bhishma: 

There was formerly a battle between the gods and demons, for the period of a 
divine year, in which the gods were defeated by the demons under the command 
of Hrada. The discomfited deities fled to the northern shore of the milky ocean, 
where engaging in religious penance they thus prayed to Vishnu: "May the first 
of beings, the divine Vishnu, be pleased with the words that we are about to 
address to him, in order to propitiate the lord of all worlds; from which mighty 
cause all created things have originated, and into whom they shall again 
dissolve! Who is able to declare his praise? We, who have been put to shame by 
the triumph of our foes, will glorify thee, although thy true power and might be 
not within the reach of words. Thou art earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, crude 
matter, and primeval soul: all this elementary creation, with or without visible 
form, is thy body; all, from Brahma to a stock, diversified by place and time. 


Glory to thee, who art Brahma, thy first form, evolved from the lotus springing 
from thy navel, for the purpose of creation. Glory to thee, who art Indra, the sun, 
Rudra, the Vasus, fire, the winds, and even also ourselves. Glory to they, 
Govinda, who art all demons, whose essence is arrogance and want of 
discrimination, unchecked by patience or self-control. Glory to thee, who art the 
Yakshas, whose nature is charmed with sounds, and whose frivolous hearts 
perfect knowledge cannot pervade. Glory to thee, who art all fiends, that walk by 
night, sprung from the quality of darkness, fierce, fraudulent, and cruel. Glory to 
thee, Janarddana, who art that piety which is the instrument of recompensing the 
virtues of those who abide in heaven. Glory to thee, who art one with the saints, 
whose perfect nature is ever blessed, and traverses unobstructed all permeable 
elements. Glory to thee, who art one with the serpent race, double-tongued, 
impetuous, cruel, insatiate of enjoyment, and abounding with wealth. Glory to 
thee, who art one with the Rishis, whose nature is free from sin or defect, and is 
identified with wisdom and tranquillity. Glory to thee, oh lotus-eyed, who art one 
with time, the form that devours, without remorse, all created things at the 
termination of the Kalpa. Glory to thee, who art Rudra, the being that dances 
with delight after he has swallowed up all things, the gods and the rest, without 
distinction. Glory to thee, Janarddana, who art man, the agent in developing the 
results of that activity which proceeds from the quality of foulness. Glory to 
thee, who art brute animals, the universal spirit that tends to perversity, which 
proceeds from the quality of darkness, and is encumbered with the twenty-eight 
kinds of obstructions. Glory to thee, who art that chief spirit which is diversified 
in the vegetable world, and which, as the essence of sacrifice, is the instrument 
of accomplishing the perfection of the universe. Glory to thee, who art every 
thing, and whose primeval form is the objects of perception, and heaven, and 
animals, and men, and gods. Glory to thee, who art the cause of causes, the 
supreme spirit; who art distinct from us and all beings composed of intelligence 
and matter and the like, and with whose primeval nature there is nothing that can 
be compared. We bow to thee, O lord, who hast neither colour, nor extension, 
nor bulk, nor any predicable qualities; and whose essence, purest of the pure, is 
appreciable only by holy sages. We bow to thee, in the nature of Brahma, 
untreated, undecaying; who art in our bodies, and in all other bodies, and in all 
living creatures; and besides whom there is nothing else. We glorify that 
Vasudeva, the sovereign lord of all, who is without soil, the seed of all things, 
exempt from dissolution, unborn, eternal, being in essence the supreme 
condition of spirit, and in substance the whole of this universe." 



Upon the conclusion of their prayers, the gods beheld the sovereign deity Hari, 
armed with the shell, the discus, and the mace, riding on Garuda. Prostrating 
themselves before him, they addressed him, and said, "Have compassion upon 
us, O lord, and protect us, who have come to thee for succour from the Daityas. 
They have seized upon the three worlds, and appropriated the offerings which 
are our portion, taking care not to transgress the precepts of the Veda. Although 
we, as well as they, are parts of thee, of whom all beings consist, yet we behold 
the world impressed by the ignorance of unity, with the belief of its separate 
existence. Engaged in the duties of their respective orders, and following the 
paths prescribed by holy writ, practising also religious penance, it is impossible 
for us to destroy them. Do thou, whose wisdom is immeasurable, instruct us in 
some device by which we may be able to exterminate the enemies of the gods." 

When the mighty Vishnu heard their request, he emitted from his body an 
illusory form, which he gave to the gods, and thus spake This deceptive vision 
shall wholly beguile the Daityas, so that, being led astray from the path of the 
Vedas, they may be put to death; for all gods, demons, or others, who shall be 
opposed to the authority of the Veda, shall perish by my might, whilst exercised 
for the preservation of the world. Go then, and fear not: let this delusive vision 
precede you; it shall this day be of great service unto you, oh gods!" 


Footnotes 

01. This idea is expressed in nearly the same terms in the Vayu P.: 'The three 
Vedas are the covering of all beings, and they who throw it off through 
delusion are called Nagnas, naked.' The notion is probably original with 
neither of the Puranas, and the metaphorical sense of the term is not that 
in which it was first employed; ascetics, whether of the Bauddha or of the 
Digambara order of Jains, being literally Nagnas, or going naked. The 
qualified application of it, however, was rendered necessary by the same 
practice being familiar to ascetics of the orthodox faith. To go naked was 
not necessarily a sign of a heretic, and therefore his nudity was 
understood to be, rejecting the raiment of holy writ. Thus the Vayu P. 


extends the word to all ascetics, including naked Brahmans, who practise 
austerities fruitlessly, that is, heretically or hypocritically: 'The Brahman 
who unprofitably bears a staff, shaves his head, goes naked, makes a 
vow, or mutters prayers, all such persons are called Nagnas and the like.' 

02. A son of Hiranyakasipu. 




18. Chapter 


Buddha goes to the earth, and teaches the Daityas to contemn the Vedas: his 
sceptical doctrines: his prohibition of animal sacrifices. Meaning of the term 
Bauddha. Jainas and Bauddhas; their tenets. The Daityas lose their power, and 
are overcome by the gods. Meaning of the term Nagna. Consequences of neglect 
of duty. Story of Satadhanu and his wife Saivya. Communion with heretics to be 
shunned. 

PARASARA.—After this, the great delusion, having proceeded to earth, beheld 
the Daityas engaged in ascetic penances upon the banks of the Narmada river 
and approaching them in the semblance of a naked mendicant, with his head 
shaven, and carrying a bunch of peacock's feathers, he thus addressed them in 
gentle accents: "Ho, lords of the Daitya race! wherefor is it that you practise 
these acts of penance? is it with a view to recompense in this world, or in 
another?" "Sage," replied the Daityas, "we pursue these devotions to obtain a 
reward hereafter; why should you make such an inquiry?" "If you are desirous of 
final emancipation," answered the seeming ascetic, "attend to my words, for you 
are worthy of a revelation which is the door to ultimate felicity. The duties that I 
will teach you are the secret path to liberation; there are none beyond or superior 
to them: by following them you shall obtain either heaven or exemption from 
future existence. You, mighty beings, are deserving of such lofty doctrine." By 
such persuasions, and by many specious arguments, did this delusive being 
mislead the Daityas from the tenets of the Vedas; teaching that the same thing 
might be for the sake of virtue and of vice; might be, and might not be; might or 
might not contribute to liberation; might be the supreme object, and not the 
supreme object; might be effect, and not be effect; might be manifest, or not be 
manifest; might be the duty of those who go naked, or who go clothed in much 
raiment: and so the Daityas were seduced from their proper duties by the 
repeated lessons of their illusory preceptor, maintaining the equal truth of 
contradictory tenets and they were called Arhatas, from the phrase he had 
employed of "Ye are worthy (Arhatha) of this great doctrine;" that is, of the false 
doctrines which he persuaded them to embrace. 

The foes of the gods being thus induced to apostatize from the religion of the 


Vedas, by the delusive person sent by Vishnu, became in their turn teachers of 
the same heresies, and perverted others; and these, again, communicating their 
principles to others, by whom they were still further disseminated, the Vedas 
were in a short time deserted by most of the Daitya race. Then the same deluder, 
putting on garments of a red colour, assuming a benevolent aspect, and speaking 
in soft and agreeable tones, addressed others of the same family, and said to 
them, "If; mighty demons, you cherish a desire either for heaven or for final 
repose, desist from the iniquitous massacre of animals (for sacrifice), and hear 
from me what you should do. Know that all that exists is composed of 
discriminative knowledge. Understand my words, for they have been uttered by 
the wise. This world subsists without support, and engaged in the pursuit of 
error, which it mistakes for knowledge, as well as vitiated by passion and the 
rest, revolves in the straits of existence." In this manner, exclaiming to them, 
"Know!" (Budhyadwam), and they replying, "It is known" (Budhyate), these 
Daityas were induced by the arch deceiver to deviate from their religious duties 
(and become Bauddhas), by his repeated arguments and variously urged 
persuasions, When they had abandoned their own faith, they persuaded others to 
do the same, and the heresy spread, and many deserted the practices enjoined by 
the Vedas and the laws. 

The delusions of the false teacher paused not with the conversion of the Daityas 
to the Jaina and Bauddha heresies, but with various erroneous tenets he prevailed 
upon others to apostatize, until the whole were led astray, and deserted the 
doctrines and observances inculcated by the three Vedas. Some then spake evil 
of the sacred books; some blasphemed the gods; some treated sacrifices and 
other devotional ceremonies with scorn; and others calumniated the Brahmans. 
"The precepts," they cried, "that lead to the injury of animal life (as in sacrifices) 
are highly reprehensible. To say that casting butter into flame is productive of 
reward, is mere childishness. If Indra, after having obtained godhead by 
multiplied rites, is fed upon the wood used as fuel in holy fire, he is lower than a 
brute, which feeds at least upon leaves. If an animal slaughtered in religious 
worship is thereby raised to heaven, would it not be expedient for a man who 
institutes a sacrifice to kill his own father for a victim? If that which is eaten by 
one at a Sraddha gives satisfaction to another, it must be unnecessary for one 
who resides at a distance to bring food for presentation in person." "First, then, 
let it be determined what may be (rationally) believed by mankind, and then," 
said their preceptor, "you will find that felicity may be expected from my 



instructions. The words of authority do not, mighty Asuras, fall from heaven: the 
text that has reason is alone to be acknowledged by me, and by such as you are." 
By such and similar lessons the Daityas were perverted, so that not one of them 
admitted the authority of the Vedas. 

When the Daityas had thus declined from the path of the holy writings, the 
deities took courage, and gathered together for battle. Hostilities accordingly 
were renewed, but the demons were now defeated and slain by the gods, who 
had adhered to the righteous path. The armour of religion, which had formerly 
protected the Daityas, had been discarded by them, and upon its abandonment 
followed their destruction. 

Thus, Maitreya, you are to understand that those who have seceded from their 
original belief are said to be naked, because they have thrown off the garment of 
the Vedas. According to the law there are four conditions or orders of men (of 
the three first castes), the religious student, the householder, the hermit, and the 
mendicant. There is no fifth state; and the unrighteous man who relinquishes the 
order of the householder, and does not become either an anchoret or a 
mendicant, is also a naked (seceder). The man who neglects his permanent 
observances for one day and night, being able to perform them, incurs thereby 
sin for one day; and should he omit them, not being in trouble, for a fortnight, he 
can be purified only by arduous expiation. The virtuous must stop to gaze upon 
the sun after looking upon a person who has allowed a year to elapse without the 
observance of the perpetual ceremonies; and they must bathe with their clothes 
on should they have touched him: but for the individual himself no expiation has 
been declared. There is no sinner upon earth more culpable than one in whose 
dwelling the gods, progenitors, and spirits, are left to sigh unworshipped. Let not 
a man associate, in residence, sitting, or society, with him whose person or 
whose house has been blasted by the sighs of the gods, progenitors, and spirits. 
Conversation, interchange of civilities, or association with a man who for a 
twelvemonth has not discharged his religious duties, is productive of equality of 
guilt; and the person who eats in the house of such a man, or sits down with him, 
or sleeps on the same couch with him, becomes like him instantaneously. Again; 
he who takes his food without shewing reverence to the gods, progenitors, 
spirits, and guests, commits sin. How great is his sin! The Brahmans, and men of 
the other castes, who turn their faces away from their proper duties, become 
heretics, and are classed with those who relinquish pious works. Remaining in a 



place where there is too great an intermixture of the four castes is detrimental to 
the character of the righteous. Men fall into hell who converse with one who 
takes his food without offering a portion to the gods, the sages, the manes, 
spirits, and guests. Let therefore a prudent person carefully avoid the 
conversation, or the contact, and the like, of those heretics who are rendered 
impure by their desertion of the three Vedas. The ancestral rite, although 
performed with zeal and faith, pleases neither gods nor progenitors if it be 
looked upon by apostates. 

It is related that there was formerly a king named Satadhanu, whose wife Saivya 
was a woman of great virtue. She was devoted to her husband, benevolent, 
sincere, pure, adorned with every female excellence, with humility, and 
discretion. The Raja and his wife daily worshipped the god of gods, Janarddana, 
with pious meditations, oblations to fire, prayers, gifts, fasting, and every other 
mark of entire faith, and exclusive devotion. On one occasion, when they had 
fasted on the full moon of Kartika, and had bathed in the Bhagirathi, they 
beheld, as they came up from the water, a heretic approach them, who was the 
friend of the Raja's military preceptor. The Raja, out of respect to the latter, 
entered into conversation with the heretic; but not so did the princess; reflecting 
that she was observing a fast, she turned from him, and cast her eyes up to the 
sun. On their arrival at home, the husband and wife, as usual, performed the 
worship of Vishnu, agreeably to the ritual. After a time the Raja, triumphant over 
his enemies, died; and the princess ascended the funeral pile of her husband. 

In consequence of the fault committed by Satadhanu, by speaking to an infidel 
when he was engaged in a solemn fast, he was born again as a dog. His wife was 
born as the daughter of the Raja of Kasi, with a knowledge of the events of her 
preexistence, accomplished in every science, and endowed with every virtue. 
Her father was anxious to give her in marriage to some suitable husband, but she 
constantly opposed his design, and the king was prevented by her from 
accomplishing her nuptials. With the eye of divine intelligence she knew that her 
own husband had been regenerate as a dog, and going once to the city of Vaidisa 
she saw the dog, and recognised her former lord in him. Knowing that the animal 
was her husband, she placed upon his neck the bridal garland, accompanying it 
with the marriage rites and prayers: but he, eating the delicate food presented to 
him, expressed his delight after the fashion of his species; at which she was 
much ashamed, and, bowing reverently to him, thus spake to her degraded 



spouse: "Recall to memory, illustrious prince, the ill-timed politeness on account 
of which you have been born as a dog, and are now fawning upon me. In 
consequence of speaking to a heretic, after bathing in a sacred river, you have 
been condemned to this abject birth. Do you not remember it?" Thus reminded, 
the Raja recollected his former condition, and was lost in thought, and felt deep 
humiliation. With a broken spirit he went forth from the city, and falling dead in 
the desert, was born anew as a jackal. In the course of the following year the 
princess knew what had happened, and went to the mountain Kolahala to seek 
for her husband. Finding him there, the lovely daughter of the king of the earth 
said to her lord, thus disguised as a jackal, "Dost thou not remember, oh king, the 
circumstance of conversing with a heretic, which I called to thy recollection 
when thou wast a dog?" The Raja, thus addressed, knew that what the princess 
had spoken was true, and thereupon desisted from food, and died. He then 
became a wolf; but his blameless wife knew it, and came to him in the lonely 
forest, and awakened his remembrance of his original state. "No wolf art thou," 
she said, "but the illustrious sovereign Satadhanu. Thou wast then a dog, then a 
jackal, and art now a wolf." Upon this, recollecting himself, the prince 
abandoned his life, and became a vulture; in which form his lovely queen still 
found him, and aroused him to a knowledge of the past. "Prince," 

she exclaimed, "recollect yourself: away with this uncouth form, to which the sin 
of conversing with a heretic has condemned you!" The Raja was next born as a 
crow; when the princess, who through her mystical powers was aware of it, said 
to him, "Thou art now thyself the eater of tributary grain, to whom, in a prior 
existence, all the kings of the earth paid tribute." Having abandoned his body, in 
consequence of the recollections excited by these words, the king next became a 
peacock, which the princess took to herself, and petted, and fed constantly with 
such food as is agreeable to birds of its class. The king of Kasi instituted at that 
time the solemn sacrifice of a horse. In the ablutions with which it terminated the 
princess caused her peacock to be bathed, bathing also herself; and she then 
reminded Satadhanu how he had been successively born as various animals. On 
recollecting this, he resigned his life. He was then born as the son of a person of 
distinction; and the princess now assenting to the wishes of her father to see her 
wedded, the king of Kasi caused it to be made known that she would elect a 
bridegroom from those who should present themselves as suitors for her hand. 
When the election took place, the princess made choice of her former lord, who 
appeared amongst the candidates, and again invested him with the character of 



her husband. They lived happily together, and upon her father's decease 
Satadhanu ruled over the country of Videha. He offered many sacrifices, and 
gave away many gifts, and begot sons, and subdued his enemies in war; and 
having duly exercised the sovereign power, and cherished benignantly the earth, 
he died, as became his warrior birth, in battle. His queen again followed him in 
death, and, conformably to sacred precepts, once more mounted cheerfully his 
funeral pile. The king then, along with his princess, ascended beyond the sphere 
of Indra to the regions where all desires are for ever gratified, obtaining ever- 
during and unequalled happiness in heaven, the perfect felicity that is the rarely 
realised reward of conjugal fidelity. 

Such, Maitreya, is the sin of conversing with a heretic, and such are the 
expiatory effects of bathing after the solemn sacrifice of a horse, as I have 
narrated them to you. Let therefore a man carefully avoid the discourse or 
contact of an unbeliever, especially at seasons of devotion, and when engaged in 
the performance of religious rites preparatory to a sacrifice. If it be necessary 
that a wise man should look at the sun, after beholding one who has neglected 
his domestic ceremonies for a month, how much greater need must there be of 
expiation after encountering one who has wholly abandoned the Vedas? one who 
is supported by infidels, or who disputes the doctrines of holy writ? Let not a 
person treat with even the civility of speech, heretics, those who do forbidden 
acts, pretended saints, scoundrels, sceptics, and hypocrites. Intercourse with such 
iniquitous wretches, even at a distance, all association with schismatics, defiles; 
let a man therefore carefully avoid them. 

These, Maitreya, are the persons called naked, the meaning of which term you 
desired to have explained. Their very looks vitiate the performance of an 
ancestral oblation; speaking to then destroys religious merit for a whole day. 
These are the unrighteous heretics to whom a man must not give shelter, and 
speaking to whom effaces whatever merit he may that day have obtained. Men, 
indeed, fall into hell as the consequence of only conversing with those who 
unprofitably assume the twisted hair, and shaven crown; with those who feed 
without offering food to gods, spirits, and guests; and those who are excluded 
from the presentation of cakes, and libations of water, to the manes. 




Footnotes 


01. The situation chosen for the first appearance of the heresy agrees well 
enough with the great prevalence of the Jain faith in the west of India in 
the eleventh and twelfth centuries (As. Res. XVI. 318), or perhaps a 
century earlier, and is a circumstance of some weight in investigating the 
date of the Vishnu Puraria. 

02. A bunch of peacock's feathers is still an ordinary accompaniment of a 
Jain mendicant. According to the Hindi poem, the Prithu Rai Charitra, it 
was borne by the Buddhist Amara Sinha; but that work is not, perhaps, 
very good authority for Bauddha observances, at least of an ancient date. 

03. In this and the preceding contradictions it is probable that the writer 
refers, although not with much precision, to the sceptical tenets of the 
Jainas, whence they are called commonly Syadvadis, assertors of 
probabilities, or of what may be. These usually form seven categories, or, 
1. a thing is; 2. it is not; 3. it is, and it is not; 4. it is not definable; 5. it is, 
but is not definable; 6. it is not, neither is it definable; 7. it is, and it is 
not, and is not definable. Hence the Jains are also termed Saptavadis and 
Saptabhangis, assertors and oppugners of seven propositions. As. Res. 
XVII. 271; and Trans. Royal As. Soc. I. 555. 

04. Here is farther confirmation of the Jains being intended by our text, as 
the term Arhat is more particularly applied to them, although it is also 
used by the Buddhists. 

05. We have therefore the Bauddhas noticed as a distinct set. If the author 
wrote from a personal knowledge of Buddhists in India, he could not 
have written much later than the 10th or 11th century. 

06. That is, according to the commentator, a Sraddha may be performed for a 
man who is abroad by any of his kinsmen who are tarrying at home; it 
will be of equal benefit to him as if he offered it himself; he will equally 
eat of the consecrated food. 

07. We have in these passages, no doubt, allusion to the Varhaspatyas, or 
followers of Vrihaspati, who seem to have been numerous and bold at 
some period anterior to the 14th century. As. Res. XVI. 5. 

08. We may have in this conflict of the orthodox divinities and heretical 
Daityas some covert allusion to political troubles, growing out of 
religious differences, and the final predominance of Brahmanism. Such 
occurrences seem to have preceded the invasion of India by the 


Mohammedans, and prepared the way for their victories. 

09. There is a play upon the word Bali, which means 'tribute,' or 'fragments 
of a meal scattered abroad to the birds,' &c. 

10. The legend is peculiar to the Vishnu Puraria, although the doctrine it 
inculcates is to be found elsewhere. 

11. Haitukas, 'causalists;' either the followers of the Nyaya or 'logical' 
philosophy, or Bauddhas, those who take nothing upon authority, and 
admit nothing that cannot be proved; or it is explained, those who by 
argument cast a doubt upon the efficacy of acts of devotion. 




The Vishnu Purana-Book 4 


01. Chapter 
02. Chapter 
03. Chapter 
04. Chapter 
05. Chapter 
06. Chapter 
07. Chapter 

Legend Of Parasurama 
08. Chapter 
09. Chapter 

10. Chapter 

11. Chapter 

12. Chapter 

13. Chapter 

14. Chapter 

15. Chapter 

16. Chapter 

17. Chapter 

18. Chapter 

19. Chapter 

20. Chapter 

21. Chapter 

22. Chapter 

23. Chapter 

24. Chapter 




01. Chapter 


Dynasties of kings. Origin of the solar dynasty from Brahma. Sons of the Manu 
Vaivaswata. Transformations of Ila or Sudyumna. Descendants of the sons of 
Vaivaswat; those of Nedishtha. Greatness of Marutta. Kings of Vaisali. 
Descendants of Saryati. Legend of Raivata; his daughter Revati married to 
Balarama. 

MAITREYA.—Venerable preceptor, you have explained to me the perpetual and 
occasional ceremonies which are to be performed by those righteous individuals 
who are diligent in their devotions; and you have also described to me the duties 
which devolve upon the several castes, and on the different orders of the human 
race. I have now to request you will relate to me the dynasties of the kings who 
have ruled over the earth. 

PARASARA.—I will repeat to you, Maitreya, an account of the family of Manu, 
commencing with Brahma, and graced by a number of religious, magnanimous, 
and heroic princes. Of which it is said, "The lineage of him shall never be 
extinct, who daily calls to mind the race of Manu, originating with Brahma." 
Listen therefore, Maitreya, to the entire series of the princes of this family, by 
which all sin shall be effaced. 

Before the evolution of the mundane egg, existed Brahma, who was 
Hiranyagarbha, the form of that supreme Brahma which consists of Vishnu as 
identical with the Rig, Yajur, and Sanaa Vedas; the primeval, uncreated cause of 
all worlds. From the right thumb of Brahma was born the patriarch Daksha his 
daughter was Aditi, who was the mother of the sun. The Manu Vaivaswata was 
the son of the celestial luminary; and his sons were Ikshwaku, Nriga, Dhrishta, 
Saryati, Narishyanta, Pransu, Nabhaga, Nedishta, Karusha, and Prishadhra. 
Before their birth, the Manu being desirous of sons, offered a sacrifice for that 
purpose to Mitra and Varuna; but the rite being deranged, through an irregularity 
of the ministering priest, a daughter, Ila, was produced. Through the favour of 
the two divinities, however, her sex was changed, and she became a man, named 
Sudyumna. At a subsequent period, in consequence of becoming subject to the 
effects of a malediction once pronounced by Siva, Sudyumna was again 


transformed to a woman in the vicinity of the hermitage of Budha, the son of the 
deity of the moon. Budha saw and espoused her, and had by her a son named 
Pururavas. After his birth, the illustrious Rishis, desirous of restoring Sudyumna 
to his sex, prayed to the mighty Vishnu, who is the essence of the four Vedas, of 
mind, of every thing, and of nothing; and who is in the form of the sacrificial 
male; and through his favour Ila once more became Sudyumna, in which 
character he had three sons, Utkala, Gaya, and Vinata. 

In consequence of his having been formerly a female, Sudyumna was excluded 
from any share in his paternal dominions; but his father, at the suggestion of 

r r 

Vasishtha, bestowed upon him the city Pratishthana, and he gave it to Pururavas. 

Of the other sons of the Manu, Prishadhra, in consequence of the crime of killing 
a cow, was degraded to the condition of a Sudra. From Karusha descended the 
mighty warriors termed Karushas (the sovereigns of the north). The son of 

r 

Nedishtha, named Nabhaga, became a Vaisya his son was Bhalandana whose son 
was the celebrated Vatsapri his son was Pransu; whose son was Prajani whose 
son was Khanitra whose son was the very valiant Chakshupa whose son was 
Vinsa whose son was Vivinsati whose son was Khaninetra; whose son was the 
powerful, wealthy, and valiant Karandhama whose son was Avikshi (or Avikshit 
) whose son was the mighty Marutta, of whom this well known verse is recited; 
"There never was beheld on earth a sacrifice equal to the sacrifice of Marutta: all 
the implements and utensils were made of gold. Indra was intoxicated with the 
libations of Soma juice, and the Brahmans were enraptured with the magnificent 
donations they received. The winds of heaven encompassed the rite as guards, 
and the assembled gods attended to behold it." Marutta was a Chakravartti, or 
universal monarch: he had a son named Narishyanta his son was Dama his son 
was Rajyavarddhana; his son was Sudhriti; his son was Nara; his son was 
Kevala; his son was Bandhumat; his son was Vegavat; his son was Budha his son 
was Trinavindu, who had a daughter named Ilavila. The celestial nymph 
Alambusha becoming enamoured of Trinavindu, bore him a son named Visala, 
by whom the city Vaisali was founded. 

The son of the first king of Vaisali was Hemachandra; his son was Suchandra; 
his son was Dhumraswa; his son was Srinjaya his son was Sahadeva his son was 
Krisaswa; his son was Somadatta, who celebrated ten times the sacrifice of a 
horse; his son was Janamejaya; and his son was Sumati. These were the kings of 



Vaisali; of whom it is said, "By the favour of Tririavindu all the monarchs of 
Vaisali were long lived, magnanimous, equitable, and valiant." 

Saryati, the fourth son of the Manu, had a daughter named Sukanya, who was 
married to the holy sage Chyavana he had also a righteous son, called Anartta. 
The son of the latter was Revata, who ruled over the country called after his 
father Anartta, and dwelt at the capital denominated Kusasthali 31. The son of 
this prince was Raivata or Kakudmin, the eldest of a hundred brethren. He had a 
very lovely daughter, and not finding any one worthy of her hand, he repaired 
with her to the region of Brahma to consult the god where a fit bridegroom was 
to be met with. When he arrived, the quiristers Haha, Huhu, and others, were 
singing before Brahma; and Raivata, waiting till they had finished, imagined the 
ages that elapsed during their performance to be but as a moment. At the end of 
their singing, Raivata prostrated himself before Brahma, and explained his 
errand. "Whom should you wish for a son-in-law?" demanded Brahma; and the 
king mentioned to him various persons with whom he could be well pleased. 
Nodding his head gently, and graciously smiling, Brahma said to him, Of those 
whom you have named the third or fourth generation no longer survives, for 
many successions of ages have passed away whilst you were listening to our 
songsters: now upon earth the twenty-eighth great age of the present Manu is 
nearly finished, and the Kali period is at hand. You must therefore bestow this 
virgin gem upon some other husband, for you are now alone, and your friends, 
your ministers, servants, wife, kinsmen, armies, and treasures, have long since 
been swept away by the hand of time. Overcome with astonishment and alarm, 
the Raja then said to Brahma, Since I am thus circumstanced, do thou, lord, tell 
me unto whom the maiden shall be given: and the creator of the world, whose 
throne is the lotus, thus benignantly replied to the prince, as he stood bowed and 
humble before him: The being of whose commencement, course, and 
termination, we are ignorant; the unborn and omnipresent essence of all things; 
he whose real and infinite nature and essence we do not know—is the supreme 
Vishnu. He is time, made up of moments and hours and years; whose influence 
is the source of perpetual change. He is the universal form of all things, from 
birth to death. He is eternal, without name or shape. Through the favour of that 
imperishable being am I the agent of his power in creation: through his anger is 
Rudra the destroyer of the world: and the cause of preservation, Purusha, 
proceeds also from him. The unborn having assumed my person creates the 
world; in his own essence he provides for its duration; in the form of Rudra he 



devours all things; and with the body of Ananta he upholds them. Impersonated 
as Indra and the other gods he is the guardian of mankind; and as the sun and 
moon he disperses darkness. Taking upon himself the nature of fire he bestows 
warmth and maturity; and in the condition of the earth nourishes all beings. As 
one with air he gives activity to existence; and as one with water he satisfies all 
wants: whilst in the state of ether, associated with universal aggregation, he 
furnishes space for all objects. He is at once the creator, and that which is 
created; the preserver, and that which is preserved; the destroyer, and, as one 
with all things, that which is destroyed; and, as the indestructible, he is distinct 
from these three vicissitudes. In him is the world; he is the world; and he, the 
primeval self-born, is again present in the world. That mighty Vishnu, who is 
paramount over all beings, is now in a portion of himself upon the earth. That 
city Kusasthali which was formerly your capital, and rivalled the city of the 
immortals, is now known as Dwaraka, and there reigns a portion of that divine 
being in the person of Baladeva; to him, who appears as a man, present her as a 
wife: he is a worthy bridegroom for this excellent damsel, and she is a suitable 
bride for him.Being thus instructed by the lotus-born divinity, Raivata returned 
with his daughter to earth, where he found the race of men dwindled in stature, 
reduced in vigour, and enfeebled in intellect. Repairing to the city of Kusasthali, 
which he found much altered, the wise monarch bestowed his unequalled 
daughter on the wielder of the ploughshare, whose breast was as fair and radiant 
as crystal. Beholding the damsel of excessively lofty height, the chief, whose 
banner is a palm-tree, shortened her with the end of his ploughshare, and she 
became his wife. Balarama having espoused, agreeably to the ritual, Revati, the 
daughter of Raivata, the king retired to the mountain Himalaya, and ended his 
days in devout austerities. 




Footnotes 

01. The complete series of the different dynasties is found elsewhere only in 
the Vayu, the Brahmanda (which is the same), the Matsya, and the 
Bhagavata Puranas. The Brahma P. and the Hari Vansa, the Agni, Linga, 
Kurma, and Garuda Puranas have lists of various extent, but none beyond 
the families of Pandu and Krishna. The Markandeya contains an account 


of a few of the kings of the solar dynasty alone; and the Padma, of a part 
of the solar and lunar princes only, besides accounts of individuals. In the 
Ramayana, Mahabharata, and in the other Puranas, occasional short 
genealogies and notices of individual princes occur. In general there is a 
tolerable conformity, but this is not invariably the case, as we shall have 
occasion to observe. 

02. In the historical passages of all the Puranas in which such occur, and 
especially in the Vishnu and Vayu, verses, apparently the fragments of a 
more ancient narrative, are frequently cited. It may also be noticed, as a 
peculiarity of this part of the Purana, that the narration is in prose. 

03. Daksha is elsewhere said to have been one of the mind-born sons of 
Brahma, or to have been the son of the Prachetasas. 

04. According to the nomenclature sometimes followed, and as we shall have 
reason to conclude intended in this place, there are ten sons of Manu. The 
commentator regards them, however, as but nine, considering Nabhaga- 
nedishta but one name, or Nedishta the father of Nabhaga. The number is 
generally stated to be nine, although there is some variety in the names, 

r r 

particularly in this name, which occurs Nabhagadishta, Nabhagarishtha; 
and also separated, as Nabhaga, Nabhaga, or Nabhaga; Nedishta, Dishta, 
and Arishta: the latter, as in the Kurma, distinctly stated, ###. Again, ### 
Brahma P. The commentator on the Hari Vansa quotes the Vedas for 

r r 

Nabhagadishta: ### but the name occurs as Nabhanedishtha in the 
Aitareya Brahmaria of the Rigveda, where a story is told of his being 
excluded from all share of his inheritance, on the plea of his being wholly 
devoted to a religious life. See also As. Res. VIII. 384. The name as 
ordinarily written, Na-bhaga, 'no-share,' has nevertheless an obvious 
connexion with the legend. The name of Nriga is found only in our text, 
the Padma, and the Bhagavata: the Vayu has Najava. Pransu is also the 
reading of the Vayu and Agni, but not of the rest, which have Vena, 
Vanya, Danda, Kusanabha or Kavi, in its place. The Mahabharata, Adi P. 
has Vena, Dhrishriu, Narishyanta, Nabhaga, Ikshwaku, Karusha, Saryati, 
Ila, Prishadhra, and Nabhagarishta. The Padma P., in the Patala Khanda, 

r r 

says there were 'ten,' and names them Ikshwaku, Nriga, Dishta, Dhrishta, 
Karusha, Saryati, Narishyanta, Prishadhra, Nabhaga, and Kavi. 

05. 'That sacrifice being wrongly offered, through the improper invocations 
of the Hotri.' It is also read 'frustrated.' This is rather a brief and obscure 
allusion to what appears to be an ancient legend, and one that has 





undergone various modifications. According to the Matsya, no change of 
sex took place in the first instance. The eldest son of Manu was Ida or Ila, 
whom his father appointed sovereign of the seven Dwipas. In his 
progress round his dominions, Ila came to the forest of Sambhu or Siva; 
entering into which, he was changed to a female, Ila, agreeably to a 
promise made formerly by Siva to Parvati, who had been once 
unseasonably broken in upon by some sages, that such a transformation 
should be inflicted on every male who trespassed upon the sacred grove. 
After a season, the brothers of Ila sought for him, and finding him thus 
metamorphosed, applied to Vasishtha, their father's priest, to know the 
cause. He explained it to them, and directed them to worship Siva and his 
bride. They did so, accordingly; and it was announced by the deities, that, 
upon the performance of an Aswamedha by Ikshwaku, Ila should become 
a Kimpurusha, named Sudyumna, and that he should be a male one 
month, and a female another month, alternately. The Vayu, which is 
followed by most of the other authorities, states, that upon Manu's 
offering their share of the sacrifice to Mitra and Varuna, instead of a boy, 
a girl was born: according to the Vedas. Manu desired her to follow him; 
whence her name Ila (from ila or ida, 'come'. There, however, Manu 
propitiates Mitra and Varuna, and the girl Ila is changed into the boy Ila 
or Sudyumna by their favour: as the Markandeya. Sudyumna's 
subsequent change to a female again, is told much as in the Matsya; but 
his being alternately male and female is not mentioned in the Vayu any 
more than it is in our text. The Bhagavata agrees in that respect with the 
Matsya, but it has evidently embellished the earlier part of the legend by 
the introduction of another character, Sraddha, the wife of the Manu. It is 
said that it was by her instigation, as she was desirous of having a girl, 
that the ministering Brahmans altered the purpose of the rite, in 
consequence of which a girl, instead of a boy, was born. The similarity of 
the name has induced the learned author of the Origin of Pagan Idolatry 
to conceive that he has found the Ila of the Hindus in the II or Ilus of the 
Phoenicians. "The Phoenician II is the masculine Ila of the Hindus and 
Indo-Scythae, and Ila was a title of Manu or Buddha, who was preserved 
in the ark at the time of the deluge:" I. 156: and he thence concludes that 
Ila must be Noah; whilst other circumstances in his Phoenician history 
identify him with Abraham. I. 159. Again; "Ilus or II is a regular Cuthic 
name of Buddha, which the Phoenicians, I have no doubt, brought with 


them; for Buddha or Manu, in the character of Ina, is said to have 
married his own daughter, who is described as the offspring of an ancient 
personage that was preserved in an ark at the time of the deluge." I. 223. 
Now whatever connexion there may be between the names of Ila, II, Ilus, 
Ilium, Ila 'the earth,' and Ilos 'slime,' there is no very obvious 
resemblance between the Pauranik legends of Ila and the Mosaic record; 
nor do the former authorize the particulars of Ina stated by Mr. Faber, on 
the authority probably of Col. Wilford. The Manu Satyavrata, who was 
preserved in the ark, is never called Ila, nor is he the father of Ila. Buddha 
was not so preserved, nor is Ila ever a title of Buddha. Budha (not 
Buddha), the husband of Ila, never appears as her father, nor is he a 
Manu, nor is she the daughter of any ancient personage preserved in an 
ark. There is not therefore, as far as I am aware, any circumstance in the 
history of Ila or Ila which can identify either with Abraham or Noah. 

06. The Matsya calls the name of the third Haritaswa; the Vayu &c., 
Vinataswa; the Markandeya, Vinaya; and the Bhagavata, Vimala. All but 
the last agree in stating that Utkala (Orissa) and Gaya in Behar are named 
after the two first. The Matsya calls the third the sovereign of the east, 
along with the Kauravas; the Vayu makes him king of the west. The 
Bhagavata calls them all three rulers of the south. 

07. The authorities agree in this location of Sudyumna. Pratishthana was 
situated on the eastern side of the confluence of the Ganges and Jumna; 
the country between which rivers was the territory of the direct male 
descendants of Vaivaswata. In the Hari Vaasa it is said that he reigned in 

r r r 

Pratishthana, having killed Dhrishtaka, Ambarisha, and Danda. M. 
Langlois had no doubt 79-4: in his copy, as he renders it, 'll donna 
naissance a trois enfans;' though, as he observes, Hamilton had called 
these the sons of Ikshwaku. The Brahma P. has not this passage, nor does 
the commentator on the Hari Vansa give any explanation; neither does 
any thing of the kind occur elsewhere. We have however, subsequently in 

r r 

the text, Danda named as a son of Ikshwaku; and in the Padma P., Srishti 

r r 

Khanda, and in the Uttara Khanda of the Ramayana, we have a detailed 
narrative of Danda, the son of Ikshwaku, whose country was laid waste 
by an imprecation of Bhargava, whose daughter that prince had violated. 
His kingdom became in consequence the Dandaka forest. The 
Mahabharata, Dana Dharma, alludes to the same story. If therefore the 
preferable reading of the Hari Vansa be Suta, 'son,' it is at variance with 


all other authorities. At the same time it must be admitted, that the same 
work is singular in asserting any collision between Danda and his 
brothers and Sudyumna, and the passage seems to have grown out of that 
careless and ignorant compilation which the Hari Vansa so perpetually 
presents. It is not improbably a gratuitous perversion of this passage in 

r 

the Matsya; 'Ambarisha was the son of Nabhaga; and Dhrishta had three 
sons.' 

08. This story has been modified apparently at different periods, according to 
a progressive horror of the crime. Our text simply states the fact. The 
Vayu says he was hungry, and not only killed, but ate the cow of his 
spiritual preceptor, Chyavana. In the Markandeya he is described as 
being out a hunting, and killing the cow of the father of Babhravya, 
mistaking it for a Gavaya or Gayal. The Bhagavata, as usual, improves 
upon the story, and says that Prishadhra was appointed by his Guru 

r 

Vasishtha to protect his cattle. In the night a tiger made his way into the 
fold, and the prince in his haste, and in the dark, killed the cow upon 
which he had fastened, instead of the tiger. In all the authorities the effect 
is the same, and the imprecation of the offended sage degraded 
Prishadhra to the caste of a Sudra. According to the Bhagavata, the prince 
led a life of devotion, and perishing in the flame of a forest, obtained 
final liberation. The obvious purport of this legend, and of some that 
follow, is to account for the origin of the different castes from one 
common ancestor. 

09. The Bhagavata also places the Karushas in the north; but the country of 
the Karushas is usually placed upon the Paripatra or Vindhya mountains. 

10. The Vayu has Nabhaga, the son of Arishta; the Markandeya has, the son 
of Dishta; the Bhagavata also calls him the son of Dishta. According to 
that authority, he became a Vaisya by his actions. The other Puranas 
generally agree that the descendants of this person became Vaisyas; but 
the Matsya and Vayu do not notice it. The Markandeya details a story of 
Nabhaga's carrying off and marrying the daughter of a Vaisya; in 
consequence of which he was degraded, it is said, to the same caste, and 
deprived of his share of the patrimonial sovereignty, which his son and 
successor recovered. The Brahma P. and Hari Vansa assert that two sons 

r 

of Nabhagarishta again became Brahmans; but the duties of royalty 
imply the Kshatriya caste of his posterity; and the commentator on our 
text observes that the son of Nabhaga was born before his father's 


degradation, and consequently the race continued Kshatriya; an assertion 
unsupported by any authority, and it must therefore appear that .a race of 
Vaisya princes was recognised by early traditions. 

11. Bhanandana: Bhagavata. 

12. Vatsapriti: Bhagavata. Vatsasri: Markandeya. The latter has a story of the 
destruction of the Daitya Kujambha by Viduratha, the father of Sunanda, 
the wife a of Vatsasri. The Vayu has Sahasrari. 

13. Pramati: Bhagavata. 

14. According to the Markandeya, the priests of the royal family conspired 
against this prince, and were put to death by his ministers. 

15. Chakshusha: Bhagavata. 

16. Vira: Markandeya. 

17. Rambha precedes Vivinsati: Bhagav. 

18. Balaswa or Balakaswa or Subalaswa, according to the Markandeya, 
which explains his name Karandhama to denote his creation of an army, 
when besieged by his revolted tributaries, by breathing on his hands. 

19. Both forms occur, as the commentator observes. The Markandeya has a 
long story of this prince's carrying off the daughter of Visala, king of 
Vaidisa. Being attacked and captured by his confederated rivals, he was 
rescued by his father, but was so much mortified by his disgrace, that he 
vowed never to marry nor reign. The princess, also becoming an ascetic, 
met with him in the woods, and they were finally espoused; but Avikshit 
kept his other vow, and relinquished his succession in favour of his son, 
who succeeded to the kingdoms of both Karandhama and Visala, 

20. Most of our authorities quote the same words, with or without addition. 
The Vayu adds, that the sacrifice was conducted by Samvartta, whom the 
Bhagavata terms a Yogi, the son of Angiras; and that Vrihaspati was so 
jealous of the splendour of the rite, that a great quarrel ensued between 
him and Samvartta. How it involved the king is not told, but apparently 
in consequence, Marutta, with his kindred and friends, was taken by 
Samvartta to heaven. According to the Markandeya, Marutta was so 
named from the paternal benediction, 'May the winds be thine,' or 'be 
propitious to thee.' He reigned, agreeably to that record, 85000 years. 

21. Omitted in the Bhagavata. 

22. A rather chivalric and curious story is told of Dama in the Markandeya. 
His bride Sumana, daughter of the king Dasarha, was rescued by him 
from his rivals. One of them, Bapushmat, afterwards killed Marutta, who 


had retired into the woods, after relinquishing his crown to his son. Dama 
in retaliation killed Bapushmat, and made the Pirida, or obsequial 
offering to his father, of his flesh: with the remainder he fed the 
Brahmans of Rakshasa origin: such were the kings of the solar race. 

23. The Bhagavata has Bandhavat, Oghavat, and Bandha. 

24. The Vayu and Bhagavata both add that she was the wife of Visravas, and 
mother of Kuvera. In the Linga P. she is said to have been the wife of 
Pulastya, and mother of Visravas. The weight of authority is in favour of 
the former statement. 

25. The Bhagavata names three sons, Visala, Sunyabandhu, and Dhumaketu. 
Vaisali is a city of considerable renown in Indian tradition, but its site is a 
subject of some uncertainty. Part of the difficulty arises from 
confounding it with Visala, another name of Ujayin; ### Hemachandra. 
Also in the Megha Duta; 'Having arrived at Avanti, proceed to the 
illustrious city before indicated, Visala.' 'To the city Ujjayini, named 
Visala. Comment. Vaisali however appears to be very differently situated. 
According to the Buddhists, amongst whom it is celebrated as a chief 
seat of the labours of Sakhya and his first disciples, it is the same as 
Prayaga or Allahabad; but the Ramayana (I. 45) places it much lower 
down, on the north bank of the Ganges, nearly opposite to the mouth of 
the Sone; and it was therefore in the modern district of Saran, as 
Hamilton (Genealogies of the Hindus) conjectured. In the fourth century 
it was known to the Chinese traveller Fa-hian as Phi-she-li, on the right 
bank of the Gandak, not far from its confluence with the Ganges. 
Account of the Foe-kiie-ki: Trans. R. As. Soc. no. IX. 

26. Dhumraksha and Samyama: Bhagavata. 

27. The text is clear enough; but, as elsewhere noticed (Hindu Theatre, II. 
296), the commentator on the Bhagavata interprets the parallel passage, 
very differently, or 'Krisaswa with Devaja,' or, as some copies read, 
Devaka or Daivata, as if there were two sons of Samyama. 

28. The Bhagavata changes the order of these two, making Janamejaya the 
son of Sumati; or Pramati, Vayu. Sumati, king of Vaisali, is made 
cotemporary with Rama: Ramayana, 1.47. 17. The dynasty of Vaisala 
kings is found only in our text, the Vayu, and Bhagavata. Hamilton 
places them from 1920 to 1240 B. C.; but the latter is incompatible with 
the date he assigns to Rama, of 1700 B. C. The co-temporary existence of 
Sumati and Rama, however, is rather unintelligible, as, according to our 



lists, the former is the thirty-fourth, and the latter the sixtieth, from 
Vaivaswata Manu. 

29. The circumstances of their marriage, of Chyavana's appropriating a share 
of offerings to the Aswini Kumaras, and of sis quarrel with Indra in 
consequence, are old in detail in the Bhagavata and Padma Puranas. 

30. In most of the other Puranas, Reva or Raiva. The Linga and Matsya 
insert Rochamana before him; and the Bhagavata adds to Anartta, 
Uttanavarhish and Bhurishena. 

31. The Bhagavata ascribes the foundation of Kusasthali to Revata, who built 
it, it is said, within the sea. The subsequent legend shews that it was the 
same, or on the same spot, as Dwaraka; and Anartta was therefore part of 
Cutch or Guzerat. 

32. So called from its many Dwaras or gateways: ### Vayu. 

33. The object of this legend, which is told by most of the authorities, is 
obviously to account for the anachronism of making Balarama 
cotemporary with Raivata; the one early in the Treta age, and the other at 
the close of the Dwapara. 





02. Chapter 


r 

Dispersion of Revata's descendants: those of Dhrishta: those of Nabhaga. Birth 
of Ikshwaku, the son of Vaivaswata: his sons. Line of Vikukshi. Legend of 
Kakutstha; of Dhundhumara; of Yuvanaswa; of Mandhatri: his daughters married 
to Saubhari. 

PARASARA.—Whilst Kakudmin, surnamed Raivata, was absent on his visit to 
the region of Brahma, the evil spirits or Rakshasas named Puriyajanas destroyed 
his capital Kusasthali. His hundred brothers, through dread of these foes, fled in 
different directions; and the Kshatriyas, their descendants, settled in many 
countries. 

From Dhrishta, the son of the Manu, sprang the Kshatriya race of Dharshtaka. 

The son of Nabhaga was Nabhaga his son was Ambarisha his son was Virupa his 
son was Prishadaswa; his son was Rathinara, of whom it is sung, "These, who 
were Kshatriyas by birth, the heads of the family of Rathinara, were called 
Angirasas (or sons of Angiras), and were Brahmans as well as Kshatriyas." 

Ikshwaku was born from the nostril of the Manu, as he happened to sneeze. He 
had a hundred sons, of whom the three most distinguished were Vikukshi, Nimi, 
and Danda. Fifty of the rest, under Sakuni, were the protectors of the northern 
countries. Forty-eight were the princes of the south. 

Upon one of the days called Ashtaka, Ikshwaku being desirous of celebrating 
ancestral obsequies, ordered Vikukshi to bring him flesh suitable for the offering. 
The prince accordingly went into the forest, and killed many deer, and other wild 
animals, for the celebration. Being weary with the chase, and being hungered, he 
sat down, and ate a hare; after which, being refreshed, he carried the rest of the 
game to his father. Vasishtha, the family priest of the house of Ikshwaku, was 
summoned to consecrate the food; but he declared that it was impure, in 
consequence of Vikukshi's having eaten a hare from amongst it (making it thus, 
as it were, the residue of his meal). Vikukshi was in consequence abandoned by 
his offended father, and the epithet Sasada (hare-eater) was affixed to him by the 


Guru. On the death of Ikshwaku, the dominion of the earth descended to Sasada, 
who was succeeded by his son Puranjaya. 

In the Treta age a violent war broke out between the gods and the Asuras, in 
which the former were vanquished. They consequently had recourse to Vishnu 
for assistance, and propitiated him by their adorations. The eternal ruler of the 
universe, Narayana, had compassion upon them, and said, "What you desire is 
known unto me. Hear how your wishes shall be fulfilled. There is an illustrious 
prince named Puranjaya, the son of a royal sage; into his person I will infuse a 
portion of myself, and having descended upon earth I will in his person subdue 
all your enemies. Do you therefore endeavour to secure the aid of Puranjaya for 
the destruction of your foes." Acknowledging with reverence the kindness of the 
deity, the immortals quitted his presence, and repaired to Puranjaya, whom they 
thus addressed: "Most renowned Kshatriya, we have come to thee to solicit thy 
alliance against our enemies: it will not become thee to disappoint our hopes." 
The prince replied, "Let this your Indra, the monarch of the spheres, the god of a 
hundred sacrifices, consent to carry me upon his shoulders, and I will wage 
battle with your adversaries as your ally." The gods and Indra readily answered, 
"So be it;" and the latter assuming the shape of a bull, the prince mounted upon 
his shoulder. Being then filled with delight, and invigorated by the power of the 
eternal ruler of all movable and immovable things, he destroyed in the battle that 
ensued all the enemies of the gods; and because he annihilated the demon host 
whilst seated upon the shoulder (or the hump, Kakud) of the bull, he thence 
obtained the appellation Kakutstha (seated on the hump). 

The son of Kakutstha was Anenas, whose son was Prithu, whose son was 
Viswagaswa, whose son was Ardra, whose son was Yuvanaswa, whose son was 
Sravasta, by whom the city of Sravasti was founded. The son of Sravasta was 
Vrihadaswa, whose son was Kuvalayaswa. This prince, inspired with the spirit of 
Vishnu, destroyed the Asura Dhundhu, who had harassed the pious sage 
Uttanka; and he was thence entitled Dhundhumara. In his conflict with the 
demon the king was attended by his sons, to the number of twenty-one thousand; 
and all these, with the exception of only three, perished in the engagement, 
consumed by the fiery breath of Dhundhu. The three who survived were 
Dridhaswa, Chandraswa, and Kapilaswa; and the son and successor of the elder 
of these was Haryyaswa; his son was Nikumbha; his son was Sanhataswa; his 
son was Krisaswa; his son was Prasenajit; and his son was another Yuvanaswa. 



Yuvanaswa had no son, at which he was deeply grieved. Whilst residing in the 
vicinage of the holy Munis, he inspired them with pity for his childless 
condition, and they instituted a religious rite to procure him progeny. One night 
during its performance the sages having placed a vessel of consecrated water 
upon the altar had retired to repose. It was past midnight, when the king awoke, 
exceedingly thirsty; and unwilling to disturb any of the holy inmates of the 
dwelling, he looked about for something to drink. In his search he came to the 
water in the jar, which had been sanctified and endowed with prolific efficacy by 
sacred texts, and he drank it. When the Munis rose, and found that the water had 
been drunk, they inquired who had taken it, and said, "The queen that has drunk 
this water shall give birth to a mighty and valiant son." "It was I," exclaimed the 
Raja, "who unwittingly drank the water!" and accordingly in the belly of 
Yuvanaswa was conceived a child, and it grew, and in due time it ripped open the 
right side of the Raja, and was born, and the Raji, did not die. Upon the birth of 
the child, "Who will be its nurse?" said the Munis; when, Indra, the king of the 
gods, appeared, and said, "He shall have me for his nurse" (mam dhasyati); and 
hence the boy was named Mandhatri. Indra put his fore finger into the mouth of 
the infant, who sucked it, and drew from it heavenly nectar; and he grew up, and 
became a mighty monarch, and reduced the seven continental zones under his 
dominion. And here a verse is recited; "From the rising to the going down of the 
sun, all that is irradiated by his light, is the land of Mandhatri, the son of 
Yuvanaswa." 

Mandhatri married Vindumati, the daughter of Sasavindu, and had by her three 
sons, Pumkutsa, Ambarisha, and Muchukunda; he had also fifty daughters. 

The devout sage Saubhari, learned in the Vedas, had spent twelve years 
immersed in a piece of water; the sovereign of the fish in which, named 
Sammada, of large bulk, had a very numerous progeny. His children and his 
grandchildren were wont to frolic around him in all directions, and he lived 
amongst them happily, playing with them night and day. Saubhari the sage, being 
disturbed in his devotions by their sports, contemplated the patriarchal felicity of 
the monarch of the lake, and reflected, "How enviable is this creature, who, 
although horn in a degraded state of being, is ever thus sporting cheerfully 
amongst his offspring and their young. Of a truth he awakens in my mind the 
wish to taste such pleasure, and I also will make merry amidst my children." 



Having thus resolved, the Muni came up hastily from the water, and, desirous of 
entering upon the condition of a householder, went to Mandhatri to demand one 
of his daughters as his wife. As soon as he was informed of the arrival of the 
sage, the king rose up from his throne, offered him the customary libation, and 
treated him with the most profound respect. Having taken a seat, Saubhari said 
to the Raja, "I have determined to marry: do you, king, give me one of your 
daughters as a wife: disappoint not my affection. It is not the practice of the 
princes of the race of Kakutstha to turn away from compliance with the wishes 
of those who come to them for succour. There are, O monarch, other kings of the 
earth to whom daughters have been born, but your family is above all renowned 
for observance, of liberality in your donations to those who ask your bounty. You 
have, O prince, fifty daughters; give one of them to me, that so I may be relieved 
from the anxiety I suffer through fear that my suit may be denied." 

When Mandhatri heard this request, and looked upon the person of the sage, 
emaciated by austerity and old age, he felt disposed to refuse his consent; but 
dreading to incur the anger and imprecation of the holy man, he was much 
perplexed, and, declining his head, was lost a while in thought. The Rishi, 
observing his hesitation, said, "On what, O Raja, do you meditate? I have asked 
for nothing which may not be readily accorded: and what is there that shall he 
unattainable to you, if my desires be gratified by the damsel whom you must 
needs give unto me?" To this, the king, apprehensive of his displeasure, 
answered and said, "Grave sir, it is the established usage of our house to wed our 
daughters to such persons only as they shall themselves select from suitors of 
fitting rank; and since this your request is not yet made known to my maidens, it 
is impossible to say whether it may be equally agreeable to them as it is to me. 
This is the occasion of my perplexity, and I am at a loss what to do." This answer 
of the king was fully understood by the Rishi, who said to himself, "This is 
merely a device of the Raja to evade compliance with my suit: the has reflected 
that I am an old man, having no attractions for women, and not likely to be 
accepted by any of his daughters: even be it so; I will be a match for him:" and 
he then spake aloud, and said, "Since such is the custom, mighty prince, give 
orders that I be admitted into the interior of the palace. Should any of the 
maidens your daughters be willing to take me for a bridegroom, I will have her 
for my bride; if no one be willing, then let the blame attach alone to the years 
that I have numbered." Having thus spoken, he was silent. 



Mandhatri, unwilling to provoke the indignation of the Muni, was accordingly 
obliged to command the eunuch to lead the sage into the inner chambers; who, 
as he entered the apartments, put on a form and features of beauty far exceeding 
the personal charms of mortals, or even of heavenly spirits. His conductor, 
addressing the princesses, said to them, "Your father, young ladies, sends you 
this pious sage, who has demanded of him a bride; and the Raja has promised 
him, that he will not refuse him any one of you who shall choose him for her 
husband." When the damsels heard this, and looked upon the person of the Rishi, 
they were equally inspired with passion and desire, and, like a troop of female 
elephants disputing the favours of the master of the herd, they all contended for 
the choice. "Away, away, sister!" said each to the other; "this is my election, he is 
my choice; he is not a meet bridegroom for you; he has been created by Brahma 
on purpose for me, as I have been created in order to become his wife: he has 
been chosen by me before you; you have no right to prevent his becoming my 
husband." In this way arose a violent quarrel amongst the daughters of the king, 
each insisting upon the exclusive election of the Rishi: and as the blameless sage 
was thus contended for by the rival princesses, the superintendent of the inner 
apartments, with a downcast look, reported to the king what had occurred. 
Perplexed more than ever by this information, the Raja exclaimed, "What is all 
this! and what am I to do now! What is it that I have said!" and at last, although 
with extreme reluctance, he was obliged to agree that the Rishi should marry all 
his daughters. 

Having then wedded, agreeably to law, all the princesses, the sage took them 
home to his habitation, where he employed the chief of architects, Viswakarman, 
equal in taste and skill to Brahma himself, to construct separate palaces for each 
of his wives: he ordered him to provide each building with elegant couches and 
seats and furniture, and to attach to them gardens and groves, with reservoirs of 
water, where the wild-duck and the swan should sport amidst beds of lotus 
flowers. The divine artist obeyed his injunctions, and constructed splendid 
apartments for the wives of the Rishi; in which by command of Saubhari, the 
inexhaustible and divine treasure called Nanda took up his permanent abode, and 
the princesses entertained all their guests and dependants with abundant viands 
of every description and the choicest quality. 

After some period had elapsed, the heart of king Mandhatri yearned for his 
daughters, and he felt solicitous to know whether they were happily 



circumstanced. Setting off therefore on a visit to the hermitage of Saubhari, he 
beheld upon his arrival a row of beautiful crystal palaces, shining as brilliantly as 
the rays of the sun, and situated amidst lovely gardens, and reservoirs of pellucid 
water. Entering into one of these magnificent palaces, he found and embraced a 
daughter, and said to her, as the tears of affection and delight trembled in his 
eyes, "Dear child, tell me how it is with you. Are you happy here? or not? Does 
the great sage treat you with tenderness? or do you revert with regret to your 
early home?" The princess replied, "You behold, my father, how delightful a 
mansion I inhabit, surrounded by lovely gardens and lakes, where the lotus 
blooms, and the wild swans murmur. Here I have delicious viands, fragrant 
unguents, costly ornaments, splendid raiment, soft beds, and every enjoyment 
that affluence can procure. Why then should I call to memory the place of my 
birth? To your favour am I indebted for all that I possess. I have only one cause 
of anxiety, which is this; my husband is never absent from my dwelling: solely 
attached to me, he is always at my side; he never goes near my sisters; and I am 
concerned to think that they must feel mortified by his neglect: this is the only 
circumstance that gives me uneasiness." 

Proceeding to visit another of his daughters, the king, after embracing her, and 
sitting down, made the same inquiry, and received the same account of the 
enjoyments with which the princess was provided: there was also the same 
complaint, that the Rishi was wholly devoted to her, and paid no attention to her 
sisters. In every palace Mandhatri heard the same story from each of his 
daughters in reply to his questions; and with a heart overflowing with wonder 
and delight he repaired to the wise Saubhari, whom he found alone, and, after 
paying homage to him, thus addressed him: "Holy sage, I have witnessed this thy 
marvellous power; the like miraculous faculties I have never known any other to 
possess. How great is the reward of thy devout austerities!" Having thus saluted 
the sage, and been received by him with respect, the Raja resided with him for 
some time, partaking of the pleasures of the place, and then returned to his 
capital. 

In the course of time the daughters of Mandhatri bore to Saubhari a hundred and 
fifty sons, and day by day his affection for his children became more intense, 
and his heart was wholly occupied, with the sentiment of self. "These my sons," 
he loved to think, "will charm me with their infant prattle; then they will learn to 
walk; they will then grow up to youth and to manhood: I shall see them married, 



and they will have children; and I may behold the children of those children." By 
these and similar reflections, however, he perceived that his anticipations every 
day outstripped the course of time, and at last he exclaimed, "What exceeding 
folly is mine! there is no end to my desires. Though all I hope should come to 
pass for ten thousand or a hundred thousand years, still new wishes would spring 
up. When I have seen my infants walk; when I have beheld their youth, their 
manhood, their marriage, their progeny; still my expectations are unsatisfied, 
and my soul yearns to behold the descendants of their descendants. Shall I even 
see them, some other wish will be engendered; and when that is accomplished, 
how is the birth of fresh desires to he prevented? I have at last discovered that 
there is no end to hope, until it terminates in death; and that the mind which is 
perpetually engrossed by expectation, can never be attached to the supreme 
spirit. My mental devotions, whilst immersed in water, were interrupted by 
attachment to my friend the fish. The result of that connexion was my marriage; 
and insatiable desires are the consequences of my married life. The pain 
attendant upon the birth of my single body, is now augmented by the cares 
attached to fifty others, and is farther multiplied by the numerous children whom 
the princesses have borne to me. The sources of affliction will be repeatedly 
renewed by their children, and by their espousals, and by their progeny, and will 
be infinitely increased: a married life is a mine of individual anxiety. My 
devotions, first disturbed by the fish of the pool, have since been obstructed by 
temporal indulgence, and I have been beguiled by that desire for progeny which 
was communicated to me by association with Sammada. Separation from the 
world is the only path of the sage to final liberation: from commerce with 
mankind innumerable errors proceed. The ascetic who has accomplished a 
course of self-denial falls from perfection by contracting worldly attachments: 
how much more likely should one so fall whose observances are incomplete? 
My intellect has been a prey to the desire of married happiness; but I will now so 
exert myself for the salvation of my soul, that, exempt from human 
imperfections, I may be exonerated from human sufferings. To that end I will 
propitiate, by arduous penance, Vishnu, the creator of the universe, whose form 
is inscrutable, who is smaller than the smallest, larger than the largest, the source 
of darkness and of light, the sovereign god of gods. On his everlasting body, 
which is both discrete and indiscrete substance, inimitably mighty, and identical 
with the universe, may my mind, wholly free from sin, be ever steadily intent, so 
that I may be born no more. To him I fly for refuge; to that Vishnu, who is the 
teacher of teachers, who is one with all beings, the pure eternal lord of all, 



without beginning, middle, or end, and besides whom is nothing." 




Footnotes 

01. According to the Vayu, the brothers of Raivata founded a celebrated race 
called Saryata, from Saryati. The Brahma R says they took refuge in 
secret places (gahana); for which the Hari Vansa substitutes (parvata 
gana) mountains. The Vayu has neither, and says merely that they were 
renowned in all regions. 

02. So the Vayu, Linga, Agni, Brahma, and Hari Vansa. The Matsya names 
three sons of Dhrishta, Dhrishtaketu, Chitranatha, and Ranadhrishta. The 
Bhagavata adds, that the sons of Dhrishta obtained Brahmanhood upon 
earth, though born Kshatriyas. 

03. But who is Nabhaga? for, as above observed, c. 1. n. 2, the son of the 
Manu is Nabhaga-nedishta, and there is in that case no such person as 
Nabhaga: on the other hand, if Nabhaga and Nedishta he distinct names, 
we have ten sons of Vaivaswata, as in the Bhagavata. The descendants of 
Nedishta, through his son Nabhaga, have been already specified; and 
after all, therefore, we must consider the text as intending a distinct 
person by the name Nabhaga; and such a name does occur in the lists of 
the Agni, Kurma, Matsya, and Bhagavata, unquestionably distinct from 
that with which it is also sometimes compounded. The Bhagavata repeats 
the legend of the Aitareya Brahmana, with some additions, and says that 
Nabhaga having protracted his period of study beyond the usual age, his 
brothers appropriated his share of the patrimony. On his applying for his 
portion, they consigned their father to him, by whose advice he assisted 
the descendants of Angiras in a sacrifice, and they presented him with all 
the wealth that was left at its termination. Rudra claimed it as his; and 
Nabhaga acquiescing, the god confirmed the gift, by which he became 
possessed of an equivalent for the loss of territory. Most of the authorities 
recognise but one name here, variously read either Nabhaga or Nabhaga, 
the father of Ambarisha. The Vayu, as well as the Bhagavata, concurs 
with the text. 

04. The Bhagavata considers Ambarisha as a king, who reigned apparently 


on the banks of the Yamuna. He is more celebrated as a devout 
worshipper of Vishnu, whose discus protected him from the wrath of 
Durvasas, and humbled that choleric saint, who was a portion of Siva: a 
legend which possibly records a struggle between two sects, in which the 
votaries of Vishnu, headed by Ambarisha, triumphed. 

05. The Agni, Brahma, and Matsya stop with Ambarisha. The Vayu and 
Bhagavata proceed as in the text, only the latter adds to Virupa, Ketumat 
and Sambhu. 

06. The same verse is cited in the Vayu, and affords an instance of a mixture 
of character, of which several similar cases occur subsequently. 
Kshatriyas by birth, become Brahmans by profession; and such persons 
are usually considered as Angirasas, followers or descendants of Angiras, 
who may have founded a school of warrior-priests. This is the obvious 
purport of the legend of Nabhaga's assisting the sons of Angiras to 
complete their sacrifice, referred to in a former note, although the same 
authority has devised a different explanation. Rathinara (or Rathitara, as 
read in some copies, as well as by the Bhagavata and Vayu) being 
childless, Angiras begot on his wife sons radiant with divine glory, who 
as the sons of the monarch by his wife were Kshatriyas, but were 
Brahmans through their actual father. This however is an afterthought, 
not warranted by the memorial verse cited in our text. 

07. So the Bhagavata. 

08. The Matsya says that Indra (Devarat) was born as Vikukshi, and that 
Ikshwaku had one hundred and fourteen other sons, who were kings of 
the countries south of Meru; and as many who reigned north of that 
mountain. The Vayu and most of the other authorities agree in the 
number of one hundred, of whom fifty, with Sakuni at their head, are 
placed in the north; and forty-eight in the south, according to the Vayu, 
of whom Vimati was the chief. The same authority specifies also Nimi 
and Danda as sons of Ikshwaku, as does the Bhagavata, with the addition 
of their reigning in the central regions. The distribution of the rest in that 
work is twenty-five in the west, as many in the east, and the rest 
elsewhere; that is, the commentator adds, north and south. It seems very 
probable that by these sons of Ikshwaku we are to understand colonies or 
settlers in various parts of India. 

09. The Vayu states that he was king of Ayodhya, after the death of 
Ikshwaku. The story occurs in all the authorities, more or less in detail. 


10. The Vayu says it was in the war of the starling and the stork; a conflict 

r 

between Vasishtha and Viswamitra, metamorphosed into birds, according 
to the Bhagavata; but that work assigns it to a different period, or the 
reign of Harischandra. If the tradition have any import, it may refer to the 
ensigns of the contending parties; for banners, with armorial devices, 
were, as we learn from the Mahabharata, invariably borne by princes and 
leaders. 

11. The Bhagavata adds, that he captured the city of the Asuras, situated in 
the west; whence his name Puranjaya, 'victor of the city:' he is also 
termed Paranjaya, 'vanquisher of foes:' he is also called Indravaha, 'borne 
by Indra.' 

12. Suyodhana: Matsya, Agni, Kurma. 

r 

13. Viswaka: Linga. Viswagandhi: Bhagav. Vishtaraswa: Brahma P. and Hari 
V. 

14. Andhra: Vayu. Ayu: Agni. Chandra: Bhagavata. 

15. Savasta and Savasti: Bhagav. Sravasti: Matsya, Linga, and Kurma, which 
also say that Sravasti was in the country of Gaura, which is eastern 
Bengal; but it is more usually placed in Kosala, by which a part of Oude 
is commonly understood. In my Dictionary I have inserted Sravanti, upon 
the authority of the Trikarida Sesha, but it is no doubt an error for 
Sravasti; it is there also called Dharmapattana, being a city of some 
sanctity in the estimation of the Buddhists. It is termed by Fa-Hian, She- 
wei; by Hwan Tsang, She-lo-va-si-ti; and placed by both nearly in the site 
of Fyzabad in Oude. Account of the Foe-kue-ki. 

16. This legend is told in much more detail in the Vayu and Brahma Purarias. 
Dhundhu hid himself beneath a sea of sand, which Kuvalyaswa and his 
sons dug up, undeterred by the flames which checked their progress, and 
finally destroyed most of them. The legend originates probably in the 
occurrence of some physical phenomenon, as an earthquake or volcano. 

17. The series of names agrees very well to Sanhataswa, called Varhariaswa 
in the Bhagavata. We have there some variations, and some details not 
noticed in our text. The Vayu, Brahma, Agni, Linga, Matsya, and Kurma, 
ascribe two sons to Sanhataswa, whom the two first name Krisaswa and 
Akrisaswa, and the rest Krisaswa and Rariaswa. Senajit or Prasenajit is 
generally, though not always, termed the son of the younger brother; but 
the commentator on the Hari Vansa calls him the son of Sanhataswa, 
whilst the Matsya, Agni, Linga, and Kurma omit him, and make 


Mandhatri the son of Ranaswa. The mother of Prasenajit and the wife of 
Akrisaswa or Sanhataswa, according to the different interpretations, was 
the daughter of Himavat, known as Drishadvati, the river so termed The 
wife of Yuvanaswa, according to the Vayu, or of Prasenajit, according to 
the Brahma, was Gauri, the daughter of Rantinara, who, incurring the 
imprecation of her husband, became the Bahuda river. The Brahma and 
Hari Vansa call Yuvanaswa her son; but in another place the Hari Vansa 
contradicts itself, calling Gauri the daughter of Matimara, of the race of 
Puru, the mother of Mandhatri; here following apparently the Matsya, in 
which it is so stated. The Brahma P. is not guilty of the inconsistency. 
The Vayu of course gives the title to Mandhatri, with the addition that he 
was called Gaurika, after his mother. Mandhatri's birth from Gauri is the 
more remarkable, as it is incompatible with the usual legend given in our 
text and in the Bhagavata, which seems therefore to have been of 
subsequent origin, suggested by the etymology of the name. In the 
Bhagavata, Mandhatri is also named Trasadasyu, or the terrifier of 
thieves. 

18. The Vayu cites this same verse and another, with the remark, that they 
were uttered by those acquainted with the Puranas and with genealogies. 

19. The Brahma and Agni omit Ambarisha, for whom the Matsya substitutes 
Dharmasena. The following legend of Saubhari occurs elsewhere only in 
the Bhagavata, and there less in detail. 

20. The great Nidhi: a Nidhi is a treasure, of which there are several 
belonging to Kuvera; each has its guardian spirit, or is personified. 

21. Of Mamata, 'mineness;' the notion that wives, children, wealth, belong to 
an individual, and are essential to his happiness. 




03. Chapter 


Saubhari and his wives adopt an ascetic life. Descendants of Mandhatri. Legend 
of Narmada and Purukutsa. Legend of Trisanku. Bahu driven from his kingdom 
by the Haihayas and Talajanghas. Birth of Sagara: he conquers the barbarians, 
imposes upon them distinguishing usages, and excludes them from offerings to 
fire, and the study of the Vedas. 

HAVING thus communed with himself, Saubhari abandoned his children, his 
home, and all his splendour, and, accompanied by his wives, entered the forest, 
where he daily practised the observances followed by the ascetics termed 
Vaikhanasas (or anchorets having families), until he had cleansed himself from 
all sin. When his intellect had attained maturity, he concentrated in his spirit the 
sacramental fires, and became a religious mendicant. Then having consigned all 
his acts to the supreme, he obtained the condition of Achyuta, which knows no 
change, and is not subject to the vicissitudes of birth, transmigration, or death. 
Whoever reads, or hears, or remembers, or understands, this legend of Saubhari, 
and his espousal of the daughters of Mandhatri, shall never, for eight successive 
births, be addicted to evil thoughts, nor shall he act unrighteously, nor shall his 
mind dwell upon improper objects, nor shall he be influenced by selfish 
attachments. The line of Mandhatri is now resumed. 

The son of Ambarisha, the son of Mandhatri, was Yuvanaswa; his son was 
Harita, from whom the Angirasa Haritas were descended. 

In the regions below the earth the Gandharbas called Mauneyas (or sons of the 
Muni Kasyapa), who were sixty millions in number, had defeated the tribes of 
the Nagas, or snake-gods, and seized upon their most precious jewels, and 
usurped their dominion. Deprived of their power by the Gandharbas, the serpent 
chiefs addressed the god of the gods, as he awoke from his slumbers; and the 
blossoms of his lotus eyes opened while listening to their hymns. They said, 
"Lord, how shall we be delivered from this great fear?" Then replied the first of 
males, who is without beginning, "I will enter into the person of Purukutsa, the 
son of Mandhatri, the son of Yuvanaswa, and in him will I quiet these iniquitous 
Gandharbas." On hearing these words, the snake-gods bowed and withdrew, and 


returning to their country dispatched Narmada to solicit the aid of Purukutsa. 


Narmada accordingly went to Purukutsa, and conducted him to the regions 
below the earth, where, being filled with the might of the deity, he destroyed the 
Gandharbas. He then returned to his own palace; and the snake-gods, in 
acknowledgment of Narmada's services, conferred upon her as a blessing, that 
whosoever should think of her, and invoke her name, should never have any 
dread of the venom of snakes. This is the invocation; "Salutation be to Narmada 
in the morning; salutation be to Narmada at night; salutation be to thee, O 
Narmada! defend me from the serpent's poison." Whoever repeats this day and 
night, shall never be bitten by a snake in the dark nor in entering a chamber; nor 
shall he who calls it to mind when he eats suffer any injury from poison, though 
it be mixed with his food. To Purukutsa also the snake-gods announced that the 
series of his descendants should never be cut off. 

Purukutsa had a son by Narmada named Trasadasyu, whose son was Sambhuta, 
whose son was Anaranya, who was slain, by Ravana in his triumphant progress 
through the nations. The son of Anaranya was Prishadaswa; his son was 
Haryyaswa; his son was Sumanas his son was Tridhanwan; his son was 
Trayyaruna; and his son was Satyavrata, who obtained the appellation of 
Trisanku, and was degraded to the condition of a Chandala, or outcast. During a 
twelve years' famine Trisanku provided the flesh of deer for the nourishment of 
the wife and children of Viswamitra, suspending it upon a spreading fig-tree on 
the borders of the Ganges, that he might not subject them to the indignity of 
receiving presents from an outcast. On this account Viswamitra, being highly 
pleased with him, elevated him in his living body to heaven. 


The son of Trisanku was Harischandra his son was Rohitaswa his son was Harita 
his son was Chunchu who had two sons named Vijaya and Sudeva. Ruruka was 
the son of Vijaya, and his own son was Vrika, whose son was Bahu (or Bathuka). 
This prince was vanquished by the tribes of Haihayas and Talajanghas anti his 
country was overrun by them; in consequence of which he fled into the forests 
with his wives. One of these was pregnant, and being an object of jealousy to a 
rival queen, the latter gave her poison to prevent her delivery. The poison had the 
effect of confining the child in the womb for seven years. Bahu, having waxed 
old, died in the neighbourhood of the residence of the Muni Aurva. His queen 



having constructed his pile, ascended it with the determination of accompanying 
him in death; but the sage Aurva, who knew all things, past, present, and to 
come, issued forth from his hermitage, and forbade her, saying, "Hold! hold! this 
is unrighteous; a valiant prince, the monarch of many realms, the offerer of many 
sacrifices, the destroyer of his foes, a universal emperor, is in thy womb; think 
not of committing so desperate an act!" Accordingly, in obedience to his 
injunctions, she relinquished her intention. The sage then conducted, her to his 
abode, and after some time a very splendid boy was there born. Along with him 
the poison that had been given to his mother was expelled; and Aurva, after 
performing the ceremonies required at birth, gave him on that account the name 
of Sagara (from Sa, 'with,' and Gara, 'poison'). The same holy sage celebrated his 
investure with the cord of his class, instructed him fully in the Vedas, and taught 
him the use of arms, especially those of fire, called after Bhargava. 

When the boy had grown up, and was capable of reflection, he said to his mother 
one day, "Why are we dwelling in this hermitage? where is my father? and who 
is he?" His mother, in reply, related to him all that had happened. Upon hearing 
which he was highly incensed, and vowed to recover his patrimonial kingdom; 
and exterminate the Haihayas and Talajanghas, by whom it had been overrun. 
Accordingly when he became a man he put nearly the whole of the Haihayas to 
death, and would have also destroyed the Sakas, the Yavanas, Kambojas, 

r 

Paradas, and Pahnavas, but that they applied to Vasishtha, the family priest of 

r 

Sagara, for protection. Vasishtha regarding them as annihilated (or deprived of 
power), though living, thus spake to Sagara: "Enough, enough, my son, pursue 
no farther these objects of your wrath, whom you may look upon as no more. In 
order to fulfil your vow I have separated them from affinity to the regenerate 
tribes, and from the duties of their castes." Sagara, in compliance with the 
injunctions of his spiritual guide, contented himself therefore with imposing 
upon the vanquished nations peculiar distinguishing marks. He made the 
Yavanas shave their heads entirely; the Sakas he compelled to shave (the upper) 
half of their heads; the Paradas wore their hair long; and the Pahnavas let their 
beards grow, in obedience to his commands. Them also, and other Kshatriya 
races, he deprived of the established usages of oblations to fire and the study of 
the Vedas; and thus separated from religious rites, and abandoned by the 
Brahmans, these different tribes became Mlechchhas. Sagara, after the recovery 
of his kingdom, reigned over the seven-zoned earth with undisputed dominion. 





Footnotes 

01. So Manu; "Having reposited, as the law directs, the holy fires in his 
breast," &c. VI. 25. 

02. The Vayu, Linga, Kurma, and Bhagavata agree in this series; the others 
omit it. 

03. The words of the text are ###, and the commentator explains the phrase, 
'the Angirasa Brahmans, of whom the Harita family was the chief.' The 
Linga reads, 'Harita was the son of Yuvanaswa, whose sons were the 
Haritas; they were on the part (or followers) of Angiras, and were 
Brahmans with the properties of Kshatriyas.' The Vayu has, 'Harita was 
the son of Yuvanaswa, from whom were many called Haritas; they were 
sons of Angiras, and Brahmans with the properties of Kshatriyas.' The 
Bhagavata has only, These (Ambarisha, Purukutsa, and Harita) were, 
according to Sridhara Swami's comment, the chiefs of Mandhatri's 
descendants, being founders of three several branches: or it may mean, 
he says, merely that they had Mandhatri for their progenitor, Mandhatri 
being by some also named Angiras, according to Aswalayana. It may be 
questioned if the compilers of the Puranas, or their annotators, knew 
exactly what to make of this and similar phrases, although they were 
probably intended to intimate that some persons of Kshatriya origin 
became the. disciples of certain Brahmans, particularly of Angiras, and 
afterwards founders of schools of religious instruction themselves. 
Mandhatri himself is the author of a hymn in the Rig-veda. As. Res. VIII. 
385. Harita is the name of an individual sage, considered as the son of 
Chyavana, and to whom a work on law is attributed. It is probably rather 
that of a school, however, than of an individual. 

04. Narmada, the personified Nerbudda river, was, according to the 
Bhagavata, the sister of the Nagas. 

05. We have some varieties here. Instead of Trasadasyu the Matsya has 
Dussaha, whom it makes the husband of Narmada, and father of 
Sambhuti, the father of Tridhanwan. The Bhagavata omits Sambhuti; the 
Linga makes him the brother of Trasadasyu; and the Agni has in his place 
Sudhanwan. 



06. Vrishadaswa: Vayu. The Matsya, Agni, and Brahma omit all between 
Sambhuta and Tridhanwan. The Bhagavata has a rather different series, 
or Anaranya, Haryyaswa, Aruria, Tribandhana, Trisanku. As Anaranya is 
famous in Hindu story, and Trayyaruna is a contributor to the Rig-veda, 
their omission shews careless compilation. 

07. The Vayu states he was banished by his father for his wickedness 
(Adharma). The Brahma R and Hari Vansa detail his iniquity at length; 
and it is told more concisely in the Linga. He carried off the betrothed 
wife of another man, one of the citizens according to the two former, of 
Vidarbha according to the latter: for this, his father, by the advice of 

r r 

Vasishtha, banished him, and he took refuge with Swapakas. The 
Ramayana has a different story, and ascribes Trisanku's degradation to 

r 

the curse of the sons of Vasishtha, to whom the king had applied to 
conduct his sacrifice, after their father had refused to do so. Before that, 
he is described as a pious prince, and the object of his sacrifice was to 
ascend to heaven. 

08. The occurrence of the famine, and Satyavrata's care of the wife and 
family of Viswamitra, are told, with some variations, in the Vayu, which 
has been followed by the Brahma and Hari Vansa. During the famine, 
when game finis he kills the cow of Vasishtha; and for the three crimes of 
displeasing his father, killing a cow, and eating flesh not previously 
consecrated, he acquires the name of Trisanku (tri, 'three,' sanku, 'sin'). 
Vasishtha refusing to perform his regal inauguration, Viswamitra 
celebrates the rites, and on his death elevates the king in his mortal body 
to heaven. The Ramayana relates the same circumstance, but assigns to it 
a different motive, Viswamitra's resentment of the refusal of the gods to 
attend Trisanku's sacrifice. That work also describes the attempt of the 
gods to cast the king down upon earth, and the compromise between 
them and Viswamitra, by which Trisanku was left suspended, head 
downwards, in mid-air, forming a constellation in the southern 
hemisphere, along with other new planets and stars formed by 
Viswamitra. The Bhagavata has an allusion to this legend, saying that 
Trisanku is still visible in heaven. The Vayu furnishes some further 
information from an older source. Both my copies leave a blank where it 
is marked, and a similar passage does not elsewhere occur; but the word 
should probably be ###, and the whole may be thus rendered: 'Men 
acquainted with the Puranas recite these two stanzas; "By the favour of 



Viswamitra the illustrious Trisanku shines in heaven along with the gods, 
through the kindness of that sage. Slowly passes the lovely night in 
winter, embellished by the moon, decorated with three watches, and 
ornamented with the constellation Trisanku:'" This legend is therefore 
clearly astronomical, and alludes possibly to some reformation of the 
sphere by Viswamitra, under the patronage of Trisanku, and in opposition 

r 

to a more ancient system advocated by the school of Vasishtha. It might 
be no very rash conjecture, perhaps, to identify Trisanku with Orion, the 
three bright stars of whose belt may have suggested the three Sankus 
(stakes or pins) which form his name. 

09. The Pauranik lists generally dismiss Harischandra very summarily, but he 
makes a conspicuous figure in legends of an apparently later date. In the 
Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, it is stated that he resides in the court of 
Indra, to which he was elevated for his performance of the Rajasuya 
sacrifice, and for his unbounded liberality. This seems to have served as 
the groundwork of the tale told in the Markarideya and Padma Puranas, 
of his having given his whole country, his wife and son, and finally 
himself, to Viswamitra, in satisfaction of his demands for Dakshiria. In 
consequence he was elevated with his subjects to heaven, from whence, 
having been insidiously led by Nareda to boast of his merits, he was 
again precipitated. His repentance of his pride, however, arrested his 
downward descent, and he and his train paused in mid-air. The city of 
Harischandra is popularly believed to be at times still visible in the skies. 

_ r 

The indignation of Vasishtha at Viswamitra's insatiableness produced a 
quarrel, in which their mutual imprecations changed them to two birds, 
the Sarali, a sort of Turdus, and the Baka, or crane. In these forms they 
fought for a considerable term, until Brahma interposed, and reconciled 
them. The Bhagavata alludes to this story, in its notice of Harischandra; 
but the Vayu refers the conflict to the reign of a different prince: see c. 2. 
n. 11. According to the Siva P., Harischandra was an especial worshipper 
of that deity; and his wife Satyavati was a form of Jaya, one of Durga's 
handmaids. 

10. Also read Rohita. Traces of his name appear in the strong holds of Rotas, 
in Behar and in the Panjab. The Bhagavata has a legend of his having 
been devoted to Varuria, before his birth, by his father, who having on 
various pleas deferred offering his son as promised, was afflicted by a 
dropsy. Rohita at last purchased Sunahsephas, who was offered as a 


victim in his stead: see hereafter, note on Sunahsephas. 

11. Omitted: Agni, Linga, and Matsya. 

12. Omitted: Agni. Dhundhu: Linga and Kurma. Champa, founder of 
Champamalini: Bhagavata. But all other authorities make Champa a 
different person, a descendant of Anga: see family of Ann, of the lunar 
race. 

13. Kuruka: Linga and Kurma. Bharuka: Bhagavata. 

14. Descendants of Yadu. The first springs from a prince who is the twelfth, 

r 

and the second from one who is the eighteenth, in the lunar line, and both 
are thus cotemporary with a prince who is the thirty-fifth of the solar 
dynasty. The Vayu adds, that they were assisted by Sakas, Yavanas, 
Kambojas, Paravas, and Pahlavas. 

15. The Haihayas we shall have farther occasion to notice. The Sakas are, no 
doubt, the Sacae or Sakai of the classical geographers, Scythians and 
Indo-Scythians, Turk or Tartar tribes, who established themselves, about 
a century and a half before our era, along the western districts of India, 
and who are not improbably connected with our Saxon forefathers. The 
Yavanas are the Ionians or Greeks. The Kambojas were a people on the 
northwest of India, of whom it is said that they were remarkable for a 
capital breed of horses. There is an apparent trace of their name in the 
Caumogees of Kaferistan, who may have retreated to the mountains 
before the advance of the Turk tribes. (Elphinstone's Caubul, 619: see 
also before.) The Paradas and Pahlavas or Pahnavas may designate other 
bordering tribes in the same direction, or on the confines of Persia. Along 
with these, in the legend that follows, the Bhagavata enumerates 
Barbaras. The Vayu adds Mahishikas, Chaulas, Darvas, and Khasas: the 
two former of which are people on the Malabar and Coromandel coasts; 
the two latter are usually placed amongst the mountaineers of the Hindu 
Kosh. The Brahma P. lengthens the list with the Kolas, the forest races of 
eastern Gondwana; the Sarpas and the Keralas, who are the people of 
Malabar. The Hari Vansa still farther extends the enumeration with the 
Tusharas or Tokharas, the Turks of Tokharestan; the Chinas, Chinese; the 
Madras, people in the Panjab; the Kishkindhas, in Mysore; Kauntalas, 
along the Narbudda; Bangas, Bengalis; Salwas, people in western India; 
and the Konkanas, or inhabitants of the Concan. It is evident from the 
locality of most of the additions of the last authority, that its compiler or 
corrupter has been a native of the Dekhin. 


16. And Kambojas: Vayu. 

17. The Asiatic nations generally shave the head either wholly or in part. 
Amongst the Greeks it was common to shave the fore part of the head, a 
custom introduced, according to Plutarch, by the Abantes, whom Homer 
calls otuBev Kopocovxec; and followed, according to Xenophon, by the 
Lacedaemonians. It may be doubted, however, if the Greeks or Ionians 
ever shaved the head completely. The practice prevails amongst the 
Mohammedans, but it is not universal. The Sakas, Scythians or Tartars, 
shave the fore part of the head, gathering the hair at the back into a long 
tail, as do the Chinese. The mountaineers of the Himalaya shave the 
crown of the head, as do the people of Kaferistan, with exception of a 
single tuft. What Oriental people wore their hair long, except at the back 
of the head, is questionable; and the usage would be characteristic rather 
of the Teutonic and Gothic nations. The ancient Persians had long bushy 
beards, as the Persepolitan sculptures demonstrate. In Chardin's time they 
were out of fashion, but they were again in vogue in that country in the 
reign of the last king, Fateh Shuh. 

18. So the Vayu, &c.; and a similar statement is given in Manu, X. 44, where 
to the Sakas, Yavanas, Kambojas, Paradas, and Pahnavas, are added the 

r r 

Paridaras (people of western Bengal), Odras (those of Orissa), Draviras 
(of the Coromandel coast), Chinas (Chinese), Kiratas (mountaineers), 
and Daradas (Durds of the Hindu Koh). From this passage, and a similar 
one in the Ramayana, in which the Chinas are mentioned, the late Mr. 
Klaproth inferred those works to be not older than the third century B. C., 
when the reigning dynasty of Thsin first gave that name to China. It was 
probable, he supposed, that the Hindus became acquainted with the 
Chinese only about 200 B. C., when their arms extended to the Oxus; but 
it is difficult to reconcile this date with the difference of style between 
the Ramayana particularly and the works of the era of Vikramaditya. It 
would seem more likely that the later appellations were interpolated. It 
must have been a period of some antiquity, when all the nations from 
Bengal to the Coromandel coast were considered as Mlechchhas and 
outcasts. 




04. Chapter 


The progeny of Sagara: their wickedness: he performs an Aswamedha: the horse 
stolen by Kapila: found by Sagara's sons, who are all destroyed by the sage: the 
horse recovered by Ansumat: his descendants. Legend of Mitrasaha or 
Kalmashapada, the son of Sudasa. Legend of Khatwanga. Birth of Rama and the 
other sons of Dasaratha. Epitome of the history of Rama: his descendants, and 
those of his brothers. Line of Kusa. Vrihadbala, the last, killed in the great war. 

SUMATI the daughter of Kasyapa, and Kesini the daughter of Raja Viderbha, 
were the two wives of Sagara. Being without progeny, the king solicited the aid 
of the sage Aurva with great earnestness, and the Muni pronounced this boon, 
that one wife should bear one son, the upholder of his race, and the other should 
give birth to sixty thousand sons; and he left it to them to make their election. 
Kesini chose to have the single son; Sumati the multitude: and it came to pass in 
a short time that the former bore Asamanjas, a prince through whom the dynasty 
continued; and the daughter of Vinata (Sumati) had sixty thousand sons. The son 
of Asamanjas was Ansumat. 

Asamanjas was from his boyhood of very irregular conduct. His father hoped 
that as he grew up to manhood he would reform; but finding that he continued 
guilty of the same immorality, Sagara abandoned him. The sixty thousand sons 
of Sagara followed the example of their brother Asamanjas. The path of virtue 
and piety being obstructed in the world by the sons of Sagara, the gods repaired 
to the Muni Kapila, who was a portion of Vishnu, free from fault, and endowed 
with all true wisdom. Having approached him with respect, they said, "O lord, 
what will become of the world, if these sons of Sagara are permitted to go on in 
the evil ways which they have learned from Asamanjas! Do thou, then, assume a 
visible form, for the protection of the afflicted universe." "Be satisfied," replied 
the sage, "in a brief time the sons of Sagara shall be all destroyed." 

At that period Sagara commenced the performance of the solemn sacrifice of a 
horse, who was guarded by his own sons: nevertheless some one stole the 
animal, and carried it off into a chasm in the earth, Sagara commanded his sons 
to search for the steed; and they, tracing him by the impressions of his hoofs, 


followed his course with perseverance, until coming to the chasm where he had 
entered, they proceeded to enlarge it, and dug downwards each for a league. 
Coming to Patala, they beheld the horse wandering freely about, and at no great 
distance from him they saw the Rishi Kapila sitting, with his head declined in 
meditation, and illuminating the surrounding space with radiance as bright as the 
splendours of the autumnal sun, shining in an unclouded sky. Exclaiming, "This 
is the villain who has maliciously interrupted our sacrifice, and stolen the horse! 
kill him! kill him!" they ran towards him with uplifted weapons. The Muni 
slowly raised his eyes, and for an instant looked upon them, and they were 
reduced to ashes by the sacred flame that darted from his person. 

When Sagara learned that his sons, whom he had sent in pursuit of the sacrificial 
steed, had been destroyed by the might of the great Rishi Kapila, he dispatched 
Ansumat, the son of Asamaujas, to effect the animals recovery. The youth, 
proceeding by the deep path which the princes had dug, arrived where Kapila 
was, and bowing respectfully, prayed to him, and so propitiated him, that the 
saint said, "Go, my son, deliver the horse to your grandfather; and demand a 
boon; thy grandson shall bring down the river of heaven on the earth." Ansumat 
requested as a boon that his uncles, who had perished through the sage's 
displeasure, might, although unworthy of it, be raised to heaven through his 
favour. "I have told you," replied Kapila, "that your grandson shall bring down 
upon earth the Ganges of the gods; and when her waters shall wash the bones 
and ashes of thy grandfather's sons, they shall be raised to Swarga. Such is the 
efficacy of the stream that flows from the toe of Vishnu, that it confers heaven 
upon all who bathe in it designedly, or who even become accidentally immersed 
in it: those even shall obtain Swarga, whose bones, skin, fibres, hair, or any other 
part, shall be left after death upon the earth which is contiguous to the Ganges." 
Having acknowledged reverentially the kindness of the sage, Ansumat returned 
to his grandfather, and delivered to him the horse. Sagara, on recovering the 
steed, completed his sacrifice; and in affectionate memory of his sons, 
denominated Sagara the chasm which they had dug. 

The son of Ansumat was Dilipa his son was Bhagiratha, who brought Ganga 
down to earth, whence she is called Bhagirathi. The son of Bhagiratha was Sruta 
his son was Nabhaga his son was Ambarisha; his son was Sindhudwipa; his son 
was Ayutaswa his son was Rituparna, the friend of Nala, skilled profoundly in 
dice. The son of Rituparna was Sarvakama his son was Sudasa; his son was 



Saudasa, named also Mitrasaha. 


The son of Sudasa having gone into the woods to hunt, fell in with a couple of 
tigers, by whom the forest had been cleared of the deer. The king slew one of 
these tigers with an arrow. At the moment of expiring, the form of the animal 
was changed, and it became that of a fiend of fearful figure, and hideous aspect. 
Its companion, threatening the prince with its vengeance, disappeared. 

After some interval Saudasa celebrated a sacrifice, which was conducted by 

r r 

Vasishtha. At the close of the rite Vasishtha went out; when the Rakshas, the 
fellow of the one that had been killed in the figure of a tiger, assumed the 

r 

semblance of Vasishtha, and came and said to the king, "Now that the sacrifice is 
ended, you must give me flesh to eat: let it be cooked, and I will presently 
return." Having said this, he withdrew, and, transforming himself into the shape 
of the cook, dressed some human flesh, which he brought to the king, who, 

r 

receiving it on a plate of gold, awaited the reappearance of Vasishtha. As soon as 

r 

the Muni returned, the king offered to him the dish. Vasishtha surprised at such 
want of propriety in the king, as his offering him meat to eat, considered what it 
should be that was so presented, and by the efficacy of his meditations 
discovered that it was human flesh. His mind being agitated with wrath, he 
denounced a curse upon the Raja, saying, "Inasmuch as you have insulted all 
such holy men as we are, by giving me what is not to be eaten, your appetite 
shall henceforth be excited by similar food." 

"It was yourself," replied the Raja to the indignant sage, "who commanded this 

r 

food to be prepared." "By me!" exclaimed Vasishtha; "how could that have 
been?" and again having recourse to meditation, he detected the whole truth. 
Foregoing then all displeasure towards the king, he said, "The food to which I 
have sentenced you shall not be your sustenance for ever; it shall only be so for 
twelve years." The king, who had taken up water in the palms of his hands, and 

r 

was prepared to curse the Muni, now considered that Vasishtha was his spiritual 
guide, and being reminded by Madayanti his queen that it ill became him to 
denounce an imprecation upon a holy teacher, who was the guardian divinity of 
his race, abandoned his intention. Unwilling to cast the water upon the earth, lest 
it should wither up the grain, for it was impregnated with his malediction, and 
equally reluctant to throw it up into the air, lest it should blast the clouds, and dry 
up their contents, he threw it upon, his own feet. Scalded by the heat which the 



water had derived from his angry imprecation, the feet of the Raja became 
spotted black and white, and he thence obtained the name of Kalmashapada, or 
he with the spotted (kalmasha) feet (pada). 

r 

In consequence of the curse of Vasishtha, the Raja became a cannibal every sixth 
watch of the day for twelve years, and in that state wandered through the forests, 
and devoured multitudes of men. On one occasion he beheld a holy person 
engaged in dalliance with his wife. As soon as they saw his terrific form, they 
were frightened, and endeavoured to escape; but the regal Rakshasa overtook 
and seized the husband. The wife of the Brahman then also desisted from flight, 
and earnestly entreated the savage to spare her lord, exclaiming, "Thou, 
Mitrasaha, art the pride of the royal house of Ikshwaku, not a malignant fiend! it 
is not in thy nature, who knowest the characters of women, to carry off and 
devour my husband." But all was in vain, and, regardless of her reiterated 
supplications, he ate the Brahman, as a tiger devours a deer. The Brahman's wife, 
furious with wrath, then addressed the Raja, and said, "Since you have 
barbarously disturbed the joys of a wedded pair, and killed my husband, your 
death shall be the consequence of your associating with your queen." So saying, 
she entered the flames. 

At the expiration of the period of his curse Saudasa returned home. Being 
reminded of the imprecation of the Brahmani by his wife Madayanti, he 
abstained from conjugal intercourse, and was in consequence childless; but 
having solicited the interposition of Vasishtha, Madayanti became pregnant. The 
child, however, was not born for seven years, when the queen, becoming 
impatient, divided the womb with a sharp stone, and was thereby delivered. The 
child was thence called Asmaka (from Asman, 'a stone'). The son of Asmaka was 
Mulaka, who, when the warrior tribe was extirpated upon earth, was surrounded 
and concealed by a number of females; whence he was denominated 
Narikavacha (having women for armour). The son of Mulaka was Dasaratha; his 

r 

son was Ilavila; his son was Viswasaha; his son was Khatwanga, called also 
Dilipa, who in a battle between the gods and the Asuras, being called by the 
former to their succour, killed a number of the latter. Having thus acquired the 
friendship of the deities in heaven, they desired him to demand a boon. He said 
to them, "If a boon is to be accepted by me, then tell me, as a favour, what is the 
duration of my life." "The length of your life is but an hour," the gods replied. 

r 

On which, Khatwanga, who was swift of motion, descended in his easy-gliding 



chariot to the world of mortals. Arrived there, he prayed, and said, "If my own 
soul has never been dearer to me than the sacred Brahmans; if I have never 
deviated from the discharge of my duty; if I have never regarded gods, men, 
animals, vegetables, all created things, as different from the imperishable; then 
may I, with unswerving step, attain to that divine being on whom holy sages 
meditate!" Having thus spoken, he was united with that supreme being, who is 
Vasudeva; with that elder of all the gods, who is abstract existence, and whose 
form cannot be described. Thus he obtained absorption, according to this stanza, 

r 

which was repeated formerly by the seven Rishis; "Like unto Khatwanga will be 
no one upon earth, who having come from heaven, and dwelt an hour amongst 
men, became united with the three worlds by his liberality and knowledge of 
truth." 

_ r 

The son of Khatwanga was Dirghabahu; his son was Raghu; his son was Aja; his 
son was Dasaratha. The god from whose navel the lotus springs became 
fourfold, as the four sons of Dasaratha, Rama, Lakshmana, Bharata, and 
Satrughna, for the protection of the world. Rama, whilst yet a boy, accompanied 
Viswamitra, to protect his sacrifice, and slew Tadaka. He afterwards killed 
Maricha with his resistless shafts; and Subahu and others fell by his arms. He 
removed the guilt of Ahalya by merely looking upon her. In the palace of Janaka 
he broke with ease the mighty bow of Maheswara, and received the hand of Sita, 
the daughter of the king, self-born from the earth, as the prize of his prowess. He 
humbled the pride of Parasurama, who vaunted his triumphs over the race of 
Haihaya, and his repeated slaughters of the Kshatriya tribe. Obedient to the 
commands of his father, and cherishing no regret for the loss of sovereignty, he 
entered the forest, accompanied by his brother Lakshmana and by his wife, 
where he killed in conflict Viradha, Kharadushana and other Rakshasas, the 
headless giant Kabandha, and Bali the monkey monarch. Having built a bridge 
across the ocean, and destroyed the whole Rakshasa nation, he recovered his 
bride Sita, whom their ten-headed king Ravana had carried off, and returned to 
Ayodhya with her, after she had been purified by the fiery ordeal from the soil 
contracted by her captivity, and had been honoured by the assembled gods, who 
bore witness to her virtue. 

Bharata made himself master of the country of the Gandharbas, after destroying 
vast numbers of them; and Satrughna having killed the Rakshasa chief Lavana, 
the son of Madhu, took possession of his capital Mathura. 



Having thus, by their unequalled valour and might, rescued the whole world 
from the dominion of malignant fiends, Rama, Lakshmana, Bharata, and 
Satrughna reascended to heaven, and were followed by those of the people of 
Kosala who were fervently devoted to these incarnate portions of the supreme 
Vishnu. 

Rama and his brothers had each two sons. Kusa and Lava were the sous of 
Rama; those of Lakshmana were Angada and Chandraketu; the sons of Bharata 
were Taksha and Pushkara; and Subahu and Surasena were the sons of 
Satrughna. The son of Kusa was Atithi; his son was Nishadha; his son was Nala 
his son was Nabhas; his son was Puridarika; his son was Kshemadhanwan; his 
son was Devanika; his son was Ahinagu his son was Paripatra; his son was Dala 
his son was Chhala his son was Uktha his son was Vajranabha; his son was 
Sankhanabha his son was Abhyutthitaswa his son was Viswasaha his son was 
Hirariyanabha, who was a pupil of the mighty Yogi Jaimini, and communicated 
the knowledge of spiritual exercises to Yajnawalkya. The son of this saintly king 
was Pushya; his son was Dhruvasandhi his son was Sudarsana; his son was 
Agnivarria; his son was Sighra; his son was Maru, who through the power of 
devotion (Yoga) is still living in the village called Kalapa, and in a future age 
will be the restorer of the Kshatriya race in the solar dynasty. Maru had a son 
named Prasusruta; his son was Susandhi; his son was Amarsha; his son was 
Mahaswat his son was Visrutavat and his son was Vrihadbala, who was killed in 
the great war by Abhimanyu, the son of Anjuna. These are the most 
distinguished princes in the family of Ikshwaku: whoever listens to the account 
of them will be purified from all his sins.} 


Footnotes 

r 

01. So the Ramayana. Sumati is called the daughter of Arishtanemi: the 
Mahabharata calls her Saivya. The story of Sagara and his descendants is 
told at length in the Ramayana, first book, and in the Mahabharata, Vana 
Parva, III. 106, et seq., as well as in most of the Purarias. 

02. Or Panchajana: Brahma. 


03. The Bhagavata has, for a Puraria, some curious remarks on this part of 
the story, flatly denying its truth. 'The report is not true, that the sons of 
the king were scorched by the wrath of the sage; for how can the quality 
of darkness, made up of anger, exist in a world-purifying nature, 
consisting of the quality of goodness; the dust of earth, as it were, in the 
sky? How should mental perturbation distract that sage, who was one 
with the supreme, and who has promulgated that Sankhya philosophy, 
which is a strong vessel, by which he who is desirous of liberation passes 
over the dangerous ocean of the world by the path of death?' 

04. Sagara is still the name of the ocean, and especially of the bay of Bengal, 
at the mouth of the Ganges. On the shore of the island called by the same 
name, tradition places a Kapilasrama, or hermitage of Kapila, which is 
still the scene of an annual pilgrimage. Other legends assign a very 
different situation for the abode of the ascetic, or the foot of the 
Himalaya, where the Ganges descends to the plains. There would be no 
incompatibility, however, in the two sites, could we imagine the tradition 
referred to a period when the ocean washed, as it appears once to have 
done, the base of the Himalaya, and Saugor (Sagara) was at Haridwar. 

05. Or Khatwanga: Brahma and Hari Vansa: but this is apparently an error. 
See note 14. 

06. Omitted: Matsya and Agni. Visruta: Linga. 

07. Nabhin: Bhagavata. 

08. Ayutayus: Vayu, Linga, and Kurma. Srutayus: Agni. Ayutajit: Brahma. 

09. 'knowing the heart of the dice.' The same epithet, as well as that of 'friend 
of Nala,' is given him in the Vayu, Bhagavata, and Brahma Puranas, and 
in the Hari Vansa, and leaves no doubt of their referring to the hero of the 
story told in the Mahabharata. Nara however, as we shall hereafter see, is 
some twenty generations later than Rituparna in the same family; and the 
Vayu therefore thinks it necessary to observe that two Nalas are noticed 
in the Puranas, and the one here adverted to is the son of Virasena; whilst 
the other belongs to the family of Ikshwaku. The same passage occurs in 
the Brahma P. and Hari V.; and the commentator on the latter observes, 
'Nala the son of Nishadha is different from Nala the son of Virasena.' It is 
also to be observed, that the Nala of the tale is king of Nishadha, and his 
friend Rituparna is king of Ayodhya. The Nala of the race of Ikshwaku is 
king of Ayodhya: he is the son of Nishadha, however, and there is 
evidently some confusion between the two. We do not find Virasena or 


his son in any of the lists. See n. 19. 

10. There is considerable variety in this part of the lists, but the Vayu and 
Bhagavata agree with our text. The Matsya and others make 
Kalmashapada the son or grandson of Rituparna, and place Sarvakama or 
Sarvakarman after him. See further on. 

11. The Vayu, Agni, Brahma, and Hari Vansa read Amitrasaha, 'foe- 
enduring;' but the commentator on our text explains it Mitra, a name of 

r 

Vasishtha, Saha, 'able to bear' the imprecation of; as in the following 
legend, which is similarly related in the Bhagavata. It is not detailed in 
the Vayu. A full account occurs in the Mahabharata, Adi R, s. 176, but 
with many and important variations. Kalmashapada, whilst hunting, 

r r 

encountered Saktri, the son of Vasishtha, in the woods; and on his 
refusing to make way, struck the sage with his whip. Saktri cursed the 
king to become a cannibal; and Viswamitra, who had a quarrel with 

r 

Vasishtha, seized the opportunity to direct a Rakshas to take possession 
of the king, that he might become the instrument of destroying the family 
of the rival saint. Whilst thus influenced, Mitrasaha, a Brahman, applied 
to Kalmashapada for food, and the king commanded his cook to dress 
human flesh, and give it to the Brahman, who, knowing what it was, 
repeated the curse of Saktri, that the king should become a cannibal; 
which taking effect with double force, Kalmashapada began to eat men. 
One of his first victims was Saktri, whom he slew and ate; and then 
killed and devoured, under the secret impulse of Viswamitra's demon, all 
the other sons of Vasishtha. Vasishtha however liberated him from the 
Rakshas who possessed him, and restored him to his natural character. 
The imprecation of the Brahman's wife, and its consequences, are told in 
the Mahabharata as in the text; but the story of the water falling on his 
feet appears to have grown out of the etymology of his name, which 
might have referred to some disease of the lower extremities, the prince's 
designation being at length, Mitrasaha Saudasa Kalmashapada, or 
Mitrasaha, son of Sudasa, with the swelled feet. 

12. His name Mulaka, or 'the root,' refers also to his being the stem whence 
the Kshatriya races again proceeded. It may be doubted if the purport of 
his title Narikavacha is accurately explained by the text. 

13. This prince is confounded with an earlier Dilipa by the Brahma R and 
Hari Vansa. 

14. The term for his obtaining final liberation is rather unusual; 'By whom 


the three worlds were affected or beloved:' the three worlds being 
identified with their source, or the supreme. The text says of this stanza 
###, and the Vayu, citing it, says ###, the legend is therefore from the 
Vedas. 

15. The lists here differ very materially, as the following comparison will 
best shew: 


Vishnu 

Matsya. 

Ramayana. 

Kalmashapada 

Kalmashapada 

Kalmashapada 

Asmaka 

Sarvakarman 

Sankana 

Mulaka 

Anaranya 

Sudarsana 

Dasaratha 

Nighna 

Agnivarna 

Ilavila 

Anamitra 

Sighraga 

Viswasaha 

Raghu 

Maru 

Dilipa 

Dilipa 

Prasusruka 

Dirghabahu 

Aja 

Ambarisha 

Raghu 

Dirghabahu 

Nahusha 

Aja 

Ajapala 

Yayati 

Dasaratha 

Dasaratha 

Nabhaga 



Aja 



Dasaratha. 


The Vayu, Bhagavata, Kurma, and Linga agree with our text, except in 
the reading of a few names; as Sataratha for Dasaratha the first; Vairivira 
for Ilavila; and Kritasarman, Vriddhasarman, or Vriddhakarman, for 
Viswasaha. The Agni and Brahma and Hari Vansa agree with the second 
series, with similar occasional exceptions; shewing that the Puranas 
admit two series, differing in name, but agreeing in number. The 
Ramayana, however, differs from both in a very extraordinary manner, 
and the variation is not limited to the cases specified, as it begins with 
















































Bhagiratha, as follows: 


Puranas. 

Ramayana. 

Bhagiratha 

Bhagiratha 

Sruta 

Kakutshtha 

Nabhaga 

Raghu 

Ambarisha 

Kalmashapada 

Sindhudwipa 


Ayutaswa 


Rituparria 


Sarvakama 


Sudasa 


Kalmashapada 



The entire Paurariik series comprises twenty descents, and that of the 
Ramayana sixteen. Some of the last names of the poem occur amongst 
the first of those of the Puranas, but there is an irreconcilable difference 
in much of the nomenclature. The Agni, under the particular account of 
the descent of Rama, has for his immediate predecessors Raghu, Aja, 
Dasaratha, as in our text; and the author of the Raghu Vansa agrees with 
the Puranas from Dilipa downwards. 

16. This is an epitome of the Ramayana, the heroic poem of Valmiki, on the 
subject of Rama's exploits. Apart of the Ramayana was published, with a 
translation by Messrs. Carey and Marshman, several years since; but a 
much more correct edition of the text of the two first books, with a Latin 
translation of the first, and part of the second, have been more recently 
published by Professor Schlegel; a work worthy of his illustrious name. 
A summary of the story may be found in Sir Wm. Jones's Works, 
Maurice's Hindustan, Moor's Pantheon, &c. It is also the subject of the 
Uttara Rama Charitra in the Hindu Theatre, in the introduction to which 
an outline of the whole is given. The story is therefore, no doubt, 
sufficiently familiar even to English readers. It seems to be founded on 
historical fact; and the traditions of the south of India uniformly ascribe 
its civilization, the subjugation or dispersion of its forest tribes of 






























barbarians, and the settlement of civilized Hindus, to the conquest of 
Lanka by Rama. 

17. The Vayu specifies the countries or cities over which they reigned. 
Anguda and Chitraketu, as the Vayu terms the latter, governed countries 
near the Himalaya, the capitals of which were Angadi and 
Chandravaktra. Taksha and Pushkara were sovereigns of Gandhara, 
residing at Takshasila and Pushkaravati. Subahu and Surasena reigned at 
Mathura; and in the latter we might be satisfied to find the Surasenas of 
Arrian, but that there is a subsequent origin, of perhaps greater 
authenticity, in the family of Yadu, as we shall hereafter see. 'Kusa built 
Kusasthali on the brow of the Vindhya, the capital of Kosala; and Lava 
reigned at Sravasti in Uttara (northern) Kosala:' &c. The Raghu Vaasa 
describes Kusa as returning from Kusavati to Ayodhya, after his father's 
death; but it seems not unlikely that the extending power of the princes of 
the Doab, of the lunar family, compelled Rama's posterity to retire more 
to the west and south. 

18. The Bhagavata is the only Puraria that omits this name, as if the author 
had been induced to correct the reading in order to avoid the necessity of 
recognising two Nalas. See above, n. 9. 

19. Here again we have two distinct series of princes, independently of 
variations of individual names. Instead of the list of the text, with which 
the Vayu and Bhagavata nearly, and the Brahma and Hari Vansa 
indifferently conform, we have in the Matsya, Linga, Kurma, and Agni 
the following: Ahinagu, Sahasraswa, Sahasraya or Sahasrabala, 
Chandravaloka, Tarapida or Taradhisa, Chandragiri, Bhanuratha or 
Bhanumitra, and Srutayus, with whom the list ends, except in the Linga, 
which adds Bahula, killed by Abhimanyu: enumerating therefore from 
Devanika but seven or eight princes to the great war, instead of twenty- 
three, as in the other series. The Raghu Vaasa gives much the same list as 
our text, ending with Agnivarria. 

20. Bala: Bhagavata. Nala: Hari V. 

21. Sthala: Bhagavata. Sala: Vayu and Brahma. Sila: Raghu Vansa. 

22. Omitted: Bhagavata. 

23. Sankha: Brahma. Khagana: Bhag. 

24. Dushitaswa: Vayu. Adhyushitaswa: Brahma. Vidhriti: Bhagavata. 

25. Omitted: Brahma and Bhagavata. 

26. Omitted: Brahma and Hari V.: but included with similar particulars by 


the Vayu, Bhagavata, and Raghu Vansa: see also, where Kausalya is 
likewise given as the synonyme of Hiranyagarbha, being, as the 
commentator observes, his Visheshanam, his epithet or attribute, born in, 
or king of, Kosala. The Vayu accordingly terms him ###, but in the 
Bhagavata the epithet Kausalya is referred by the commentator to 
Yajnawalkya, the pupil of Hiranyanabha. The author of the Raghu Vansa, 
not understanding the meaning of the term, has converted Kausalya into 
the son of Hiranyanabha. Raghu V. 18. 27. The Bhagavata, like our text, 
calls the prince the pupil of Jaimini. The Vayu, more correctly, 'the pupil 
of the sage's grandson.' There seems to be, however, something unusual 
in the account given of the relation borne by the individuals named to 
each other. As a pupil of Jaimini, Hiranyanabha is a teacher of the Sama- 
veda, but Yajnawalkya is the teacher of the Vajasaneyi branch of the 
Yajush. Neither of them is specified by Mr. Colebrooke amongst the 
authorities of the Patanjala or Yoga philosophy; nor does either appear as 
a disciple of Jaimini in his character of founder of the Mimansa school. 
Trans. R. As. Soc. vol. I. 

27. Arthasiddhi: Brahma R and Hari V. 

28. Maruta: Brahma R and Hari V. These authorities omit the succeeding 
four names. 

29. Sahaswat: Vayu. 

30. Viswasaha: Bhagavata. 

31. The list closes here, as the author of the Puranas, Vyasa, is cotemporary 
with the great war. The line of Ikshwaku is resumed prophetically in the 
twenty-second chapter. 





05. Chapter 


Kings of Mithila. Legend of Nimi, the son of Ikshwaku. Birth of Janaka. 
Sacrifice of Siradhwaja. Origin of Sita. Descendants of Kusadhwaja. Kriti the 
last of the Maithila princes. 

THE son of Ikshwaku, who was named Nimi, instituted a sacrifice that was to 
endure for a thousand years, and applied to Vasishtha to offer the oblations. 
Vasishtha in answer said, that he had been preengaged by Indra for five hundred 
years, but that if the Raja, would wait for some time, he would come and 
officiate as superintending priest. The king made no answer, and Vasishtha went 
away, supposing that he had assented. When the sage had completed the 
performance of the ceremonies he had conducted for Indra, he returned with all 
speed to Nimi, purposing to render him the like office. When he arrived, 
however, and found that Nimi had retained Gautama and other priests to minister 
at his sacrifice, he was much displeased, and pronounced upon the king, who 
was then asleep, a curse to this effect, that since he had not intimated his 
intention, but transferred to Gautama the duty he had first entrusted to himself, 
Vasishtha, Nimi should thenceforth cease to exist in a corporeal form. When 
Nimi woke, and knew what had happened, he in return denounced as an 
imprecation upon his unjust preceptor, that he also should lose his bodily 
existence, as the punishment of uttering a curse upon him without previously 
communicating with him. Nimi then abandoned his bodily condition. The spirit 

r 

of Vasishtha also leaving his body, was united with the spirits of Mitra and 
Varuna for a season, until, through their passion for the nymph Urvasi, the sage 
was born again in a different shape. The corpse of Nimi was preserved from 
decay by being embalmed with fragrant oils and resins, and it remained as entire 
as if it were immortal. When the sacrifice was concluded, the priests applied to 
the gods, who had come to receive their portions, that they would confer a 
blessing upon the author of the sacrifice. The gods were willing to restore him to 
bodily life, but Nimi declined its acceptance, saying, "O deities, who are the 
alleviators of all worldly suffering, there is not in the world a deeper cause of 
distress than the separation of soul and body: it is therefore my wish to dwell in 
the eyes of all beings, but never more to resume a corporeal shape!" To this 
desire the gods assented, and Nimi was placed by them in the eyes of all living 


creatures; in consequence of which their eyelids are ever opening and shutting. 

As Nimi left no successor, the Munis, apprehensive of the consequences of the 
earth being without a ruler, agitated the body of the prince, and produced from it 
a prince who was called Janaka, from being born without a progenitor. In 
consequence of his father being without a body (videha), he was termed also 
Vaideha, 'the son of the bodiless;' and the further received the name of Mithi, 
from having been produced by agitation (mathana). The son of Janaka was 
Udavasu; his son was Nandivarddhana; his son was Suketu; his son was 
Devarata; his son was Vrihaduktha; his son was Mahavirya; his son was 
Satyadhriti; his son was Dhrishtaketu; his son was Haryyaswa; his son was 
Maru; his son was Pratibandhaka; his son was Kritaratha; his son was Krita; his 
son was Vibudha; his son was Mahadhriti; his son was Kritirata; his son was 
Maharoman; his son was Suvarriaroman; his son was Hraswaroman; his son was 
Siradhwaja. 

Siradhwaja ploughing the ground, to prepare it for a sacrifice which he instituted 
in order to obtain progeny, there sprang up in the furrow a damsel, who became 
his daughter Sita. The brother of Siradhwaja was Kusadhwaja, who was king of 
Kasi he had a son also, named Bhanumat. The son of Bhanumat was 
Satadyumna; his son was Suchi; his son was Urjjavaha; his son was 
Satyadhwaja; his son was Kuni his son was Anjana; his son was Ritujit; his son 

was Arishtanemi his son was Srutayus; his son was Suparswa; his son was 

Sanjaya his son was Kshemari his son was Anenas his son was Minaratha his son 
was Satyaratha; his son was Satyarathi his son was Upagu his son was Sruta his 
son was Saswata his son was Sudhanwan; his son was Subhasa; his son was 

Susruta his son was Jaya; his son was Vijaya; his son was Rita; his son was 

Sunaya his son was Vitahavya; his son was Dhriti; his son was Bahulaswa; his 
son was Kriti, with whom terminated the family of Janaka. These are the kings 
of Mithila, who for the most part will be proficient in spiritual knowledge. 


Footnotes 


01. None of the authorities, except the Vayu and Bhagavata, contain the 


series of kings noticed in this chapter. 

02. This shews that the Hindus were not unacquainted with the Egyptian art 
of embalming dead bodies. In the Kasi Khanda, s. 30, an account is given 
of a Brahman who carries his mother's bones, or rather her corpse, from 
Setuhandha or Rameswara to Kasi. For this purpose he first washes it 
with the five excretions of a cow, and the five pure fluids, or milk, curds, 
ghee, honey, and sugar. He then embalms it with Yakshakarddama, a 
composition of Agallochum, camphor, musk, saffron, sandal, and a resin 
called Kakkola; and envelopes it severally with Netra vastra, flowered 
muslin; Pattamvara, silk; Surasa vastra, coarse cotton; Manjishtha, cloth 
dyed with madder; and Nepala Kambala, nepal blanketing. He then 
covers it with pure clay, and puts the whole into a coffin of copper, 
Tamra samputa. These practices are not only unknown, but would be 
thought impure in the present day. 

03. These legends are intended to explain, and were probably suggested by, 
the terms Vaideha and Mithila, applied to the country upon the Gandak 
and Kai rivers, the modern Tirhut. The Ramayana places a prince named 
Mithi between Nimi and Janaka, whence comes the name Mithila. In 
other respects the list of kings of Mithila agrees, except in a few names. 
Janaka the successor of Nimi is different from Janaka who is celebrated 
as the father of Sita. One of them, which, does not appear, is also 
renowned as a philosopher, and patron of philosophical teachers. 
Mahabharata, Moksha Dharma. According to the Vayu P., Nimi founded 
a city called Jayantapur, near the Asrama of Gautama. The remains of a 
city called Janakpur, on the northern skirts of the district, are supposed to 
indicate the site of a city founded by one of the princes so named. 

04. This identifies Siradhwaja with the second Janaka, the father-in-law of 
Rama. The story of Sita's birth, or rather discovery, is narrated in the 
Aranya Khanda of the Ramayana, the Vana Parva of the Mahabharata, 
and in the Vayu, Brahma Vaivartta, Kalika, and other Puranas. 

05. The Ramayana says, 'of Sankasya,' which is no doubt the correct reading. 
Fa Hian found the kingdom of Sang-kia-shi in the Doab, about Mainpuri. 
Account of the Foe-kue-ki. The Bhagavata makes Kusadhwaja the son of 
Siradwaja. 

06. The Bhagavata differs from our authority here considerably, by inserting 
several princes between Kusadhwaja and Bhanumat; or, Dharmadhwaja, 
who has two sons, Kritadhwaja and Khandikya; the former is the father 


of Kesidhwaja, the latter of Bhanumat. See the last book of the Vishnu. 

07. Sakuni, and the last of the series, according to the Vayu, 

08. Between this prince and Suchi the series of the Bhagavata is Sanadhwaja, 
Urddhwaketu, Aja, Purujit. The following variations are from the same 
authority. 

09. Chitraratha. 

10. Kshemadhi. 

11. Omitted. 

12. Samaratha. 

13. Omitted. 

14. Upaguru. 

15. Upagupta. 

16. Vaswananta. 

17. Yuyudhana, Subhashana, Sruta. 

18. Sunaka. 

19. ### is the reading of all the copies; but why the future verb, 'will be,' is 
used does not appear. 

20. Descendants of two of the other sons of the Manu are noticed in the 
Bhagavata; from Nriga, it is said, proceeded Sumati, Bhutajyotish, Vasu, 
Pratika, Oghavat, and his sister Oghavati, married to Sudarsana. The 
Linga gives three sons to Nriga, Vrisha, Dhrishtaka, and Ranadhrishta, 
and alludes to a legend of his having been changed to a lizard by the 
curse of a Brahman. Narishyanta's descendants were Chitrasena, Daksha, 
Madhwat, Purva, Indrasena, Vitihotra, Satyasrava, Urusravas, Devadatta, 
Agnivesya, also called Jatukarna, a form of Agni, and progenitor of the 
Agnivesya Brahmans. In the Brahma P. and Hari V. the sons of 
Narishyat, whom the commentator on the latter considers as the same 
with Narishyanta, are termed Sacas, Sacae or Scythians; whilst, again, it 
is said that the son of Narishyanta was Dama, or, as differently read, 
Yams. As this latter affiliation is stated in the authorities, it would appear 
as if this Narishyanta was one of the sons of the Manu; but this is only a 
proof of the carelessness of the compilation, for in the Vishnu, Vayu, and 
Markandeya Puranas, Narishyanta, the father of Dama, is the son of 

r r 

Marutta, the fourteenth of the posterity of Dishta or Nedishta. 





06. Chapter 


Kings of the lunar dynasty. Origin of Soma, or the moon: he carries off Tara, the 
wife of Vrihaspati: war between the gods and Asuras in consequence: appeased 
by Brahma. Birth of Budha: married to Ila, daughter of Vaivaswata. Legend of 
his son Pururavas, and the nymph Urvasi: the former institutes offerings with 
fire: ascends to the sphere of the Gandharbas. 

MAITREYA.—You have given me, reverend preceptor, an account of the kings 
of the dynasty of the sun: I am now desirous to hear a description of the princes 
who trace their lineage from the moon, and whose race is still celebrated for 
glorious deeds. Thou art able to relate it to me, Brahman, if thou wilt so favour 
me. 

PARASARA.—You shall hear from me, Maitreya, an account of the illustrious 
family of the moon, which has produced many celebrated rulers of the earth; a 
race adorned by the regal qualities of strength, valour, magnificence, prudence, 
and activity; and enumerating amongst its monarchs Nahusha, Yayati, 
Kartaviryarjuna, and others equally renowned. That race will I describe to you: 
do you attend. 

Atri was the son of Brahma, the creator of the universe, who sprang from the 
lotus that grew from the navel of Narayana. The son of Atri was Soma (the 
moon), whom Brahma installed as the sovereign of plants, of Brahmans, and of 
the stars. Soma celebrated the Rajasuya sacrifice, and from the glory thence 
acquired, and the extensive dominion with which he had been invested, he 
became arrogant and licentious, and carried off Tara, the wife of Vrihaspati, the 
preceptor of the gods. In vain Vrihaspati sought to recover his bride; in vain 
Brahma commanded, and the holy sages remonstrated; Soma refused to 
relinquish her. Usanas, out of enmity to Vrihaspati, took part with Soma. Rudra, 
who had studied under Angiras, the father of Vrihaspati, befriended his fellow- 
student. In consequence of Usanas, their preceptor, joining Soma, Jambha, 
Kujambha, and all the Daityas, Danavas, and other foes of the gods, came also to 
his assistance; whilst Indra and all the gods were the allies of Vrihaspati. 


Then there ensued a fierce contest, which, being on account of Taraka (or Tara), 
was termed the Tarakamaya or Taraka war. In this the gods, led by Rudra, hurled 
their missiles on the enemy; and the Daityas with equal determination assailed 
the gods. Earth, shaken to her centre by the struggle between such foes, had 
recourse to Brahma for protection; on which he interposed, and commanding 
Usanas with the demons and Rudra with the deities to desist from strife, 
compelled Soma to restore Tara to her husband. Finding that she was pregnant, 
Vrihaspati desired her no longer to retain her burden; and in obedience to his 
orders she was delivered of a son, whom she deposited in a clump of long Munja 
grass. The child, from the moment of its birth, was endued with a splendour that 
dimmed the radiance of every other divinity, and both Vrihaspati and Soma, 
fascinated by his beauty, claimed him as their child. The gods, in order to settle 
the dispute, appealed to Tara; but she was ashamed, and would make no answer. 
As she still continued mute to their repeated applications, the child became 
incensed, and was about to curse her, saying, "Unless, vile woman, you 
immediately declare who is my father, I will sentence you to such a fate as shall 
deter every female in future from hesitating to speak the truth." On this, Brahma 
again interfered, and pacified the child; and then, addressing Tara, said, "Tell 
me, daughter, is this the child of Vrihaspati, or of Soma?" "Of Soma," said Tara, 
blushing. As soon as she had spoken, the lord of the constellations, his 
countenance bright, and expanding with rapture, embraced his son, and said, 
"Well done, my boy; verily thou art wise:" and hence his name was Budha. 

It has already been related how Budha begot Pururavas by Ila. Puriiravas was a 
prince renowned for liberality, devotion, magnificence, and love of truth, and for 
personal beauty. Urvasi having incurred the imprecation of Mitra and Varuria, 
determined to take up her abode in the world of mortals; and descending 
accordingly, beheld Pururavas. As soon as she saw him she forgot all reserve, 
and disregarding the delights of Swarga, became deeply enamoured of the 
prince. Beholding her infinitely superior to all other females in grace, elegance, 
symmetry, delicacy, and beauty, Pururavas was equally fascinated by Urvasi: 
both were inspired by similar sentiments, and mutually feeling that each was 
every thing to the other, thought no more of any other object. Confiding in his 
merits, Pururavas addressed the nymph, and said, "Fair creature, I love you; have 
compassion on me, and return my affection." Urvasi, half averting her face 
through modesty, replied, "I will do so, if you will observe the conditions I have 
to propose." "What are they?" inquired the prince; "declare them." "I have two 



rams," said the nymph, "which I love as children; they must be kept near my 
bedside, and never suffered to be carried away: you must also take care never to 
he seen by me undressed; and clarified butter alone must be my food." To these 
terms the king readily gave assent. 

After this, Pururavas and Urvasi dwelt together in Alaka, sporting amidst the 
groves and lotus-crowned lakes of Chaitraratha, and the other forests there 
situated, for sixty-one thousand years. The love of Pururavas for his bride 
increased every day of its duration; and the affection of Urvasi augmenting 
equally in fervour, she never called to recollection residence amongst the 
immortals. Not so with the attendant spirits at the court of Indra; and nymphs, 
genii, and quiristers, found heaven itself but dull whilst Urvasi was away. 
Knowing the agreement that Urvasi had made with the king, Viswavasu was 
appointed by the Gandharbas to effect its violation; and he, coming by night to 
the chamber where they slept, carried off one of the rams. Urvasi was awakened 
by its cries, and exclaimed, Ah me! who has stolen one of my children? Had I a 
husband, this would not have happened! To whom shall I apply for aid?" The 
Raja overheard her lamentation, but recollecting that he was undressed, and that 
Urvasi might see him in that state, did not move from the couch. Then the 
Gandharbas came and stole the other ram; and Urvasi, hearing it bleat, cried out 
that a woman had no protector who was the bride of a prince so dastardly as to 
submit to this outrage. This incensed Pururavas highly, and trusting that the 
nymph would not see his person, as it was dark, he rose, and took his sword, and 
pursued the robbers, calling upon them to stop, and receive their punishment. At 
that moment the Gandharbas caused a flash of brilliant lightning to play upon the 
chamber, and Urvasi beheld the king undressed: the compact was violated, and 
the nymph immediately disappeared. The Gandharbas, abandoning the rams, 
departed to the region of the gods. 

Having recovered the animals, the king returned delighted to his couch, but there 
he beheld no Urvasi; and not finding her any where, he wandered naked over the 
world, like one insane. At length coming to Kurukshetra, he saw Urvasi sporting 
with four other nymphs of heaven in a lake beautified with lotuses, and he ran to 
her, and called her his wife, and wildly implored her to return. "Mighty 
monarch," said the nymph, "refrain from this extravagance. I am now pregnant: 
depart at present, and come hither again at the end of a year, when I will deliver 
to you a son, and remain with you for one night." Pururavas, thus comforted, 



returned to his capital. Urvasi said to her companions, "This prince is a most 
excellent mortal: I lived with him long and affectionately united." "It was well 
done of you," they replied; "he is indeed of comely appearance, and one with 
whom we could live happily for ever." 

When the year had expired, Urvasi and the monarch met at Kurukshetra, and she 
consigned to him his first-born Ayus; and these annual interviews were repeated, 
until she had borne to him five sons. She then said to Pururavas, "Through 
regard for me, all the Gandharbas have expressed their joint purpose to bestow 
upon my lord their benediction: let him therefore demand a boon." The Raja 
replied, "My enemies are all destroyed, my faculties are all entire; I have friends 
and kindred, armies and treasures: there is nothing which I may not obtain 
except living in the same region with my Urvasi. My only desire therefore is, to 
pass my life with her." When he had thus spoken, the Gandharbas brought to 
Pururavas a vessel with fire, and said to him, "Take this fire, and, according to 
the precepts of the Vedas, divide it into three fires; then fixing your mind upon 
the idea of living with Urvasi, offer oblations, and you shall assuredly obtain 
your wishes." The Raja took the brasier, and departed, and came to a forest. 
Then he began to reflect that he had committed a great folly in bringing away the 
vessel of fire instead of his bride; and leaving the vessel in the wood, he went 
disconsolate to his palace. In the middle of the night he awoke, and considered 
that the Gandharbas had given him the brasier to enable him to obtain the felicity 
of living with Urvasi, and that it was absurd in him to have left it by the way. 
Resolving therefore to recover it, he rose, and went to the place where he had 
deposited the vessel; but it was gone. In its stead he saw a young Aswattha tree 
growing out of a Sami plant, and he reasoned with himself, and said, "I left in 
this spot a vessel of fire, and now behold a young Aswattha tree growing out of a 
Sami plant. Verily I will take these types of fire to my capital, and there, having 
engendered fire by their attrition, I will worship it." Having thus determined, he 
took the plants to his city, and prepared their wood for attrition, with pieces of as 
many inches long as there are syllables in the Gayatri: he recited that holy verse, 
and rubbed together sticks of as many inches as he recited syllables in the 
Gayatri. Having thence elicited fire, he made it threefold, according to the 
injunctions of the Vedas, and offered oblations with it, proposing as the end of 
the ceremony reunion with Urvasi. In this way, celebrating many sacrifices 
agreeably to the form in which offerings are presented with fire, Pururavas 
obtained a seat in the sphere of the Gandharbas, and was no more separated from 



his beloved. Thus fire, that was at first but one, was made threefold in the 
present Manwantara by the son of Ila. 




Footnotes 

01. The Vayu says the essence of Soma (Somatwa) issued from the eyes of 
Atri, and impregnated the ten quarters. The Bhagavata says merely that 
Soma was born from the eyes of Atri. The Brahma P. and Hari V. give a 
grosser name to the effusion. 

02. 'He who knows.' Much erroneous speculation has originated in 
confounding this Budha, the son of Soma, and regent of the planet 
Mercury, 'he who knows,' the intelligent, with Buddha, any deified 
mortal, or 'he by whom truth is known;' or, as individually applicable, 
Gautama or Sakya, son of the Raja Suddhodana, by whom the Buddhists 
themselves aver their doctrines were first promulgated. The two 
characters have nothing in common, and the names are identical only 
when one or other is misspelt. 

03. The story of Pururavas is told much in the same strain as follows, though 
with some variations, and in greater or less detail, in the Vayu, Matsya, 
Vamana, Padma, and Bhagavata Purarias. It is also referred to in the 
Mahabharata, vol. I. It is likewise the subject of the Vikrama and Urvasi 
of Kalidasa, in which drama the incidents offensive to good taste are not 
noticed. See Hindu Theatre, vol. I. The Matsya Puraria, besides this story, 
which is translated in the introduction to the drama, has in another part, c. 
94, an account of a Pururavas, who, in the Chakshusha Manwantara, was 
king of Madra, and who by the worship of Vishnu obtained a residence 
with the Gandharbas. 

04. One copy has sixty-one years; the Brahma P. and Hari V. have fifty-nine: 
one period is as likely as the other. 

05. It does not appear why this passage is repeated. The length of the sticks, 
conformably to the number of syllables in the usual form of the Gayatri, 
would be twenty-four inches. The Bhagavata attaches to the operation a 
piece of mysticism of a Tantrika origin: Pururavas, whilst performing the 
attrition, mentally identifies himself and Urvasi with the two sticks, and 


repeats the Mantra, ###. 

06. The division of one fire into three is ascribed to Pururavas by the 
Mahabharata and the rest. The commentator on the former specifies them 
as the Garhapatya, Dakshiria, and Ahavaniya, which Sir Wm. Jones, 
Manu, II. 231, renders nuptial, ceremonial, and sacrificial fires; or rather, 
1. household, that which is perpetually maintained by a householder; 2. a 
fire for sacrifices, placed to the south of the rest; and 3. a consecrated fire 
for oblations; forming the Tretagni, or triad of sacred fires, in opposition 
to the Laukika, or merely temporal ones. To Pururavas it would appear 
the triple arrangement was owing; but there are some other curious 
traditions regarding him, which indicate his being the author of some 
important innovations in the Hindu ritual. The Bhagavata says, that 
before his time there was but one Veda, one caste, one fire, and one god, 
Narayaria; and that, in the beginning of the Treta age, Pururavas made 
them all 'three:' that is, according to the commentator, the ritual was then 
instituted: The Matsya P. has an account of this prince's going to the orbit 
of the sun and moon at every conjunction, when oblations to progenitors 
are to be offered, as if obsequial rites had originated with Pururavas. The 
Mahabharata states some still more remarkable particulars. 'The glorious 
Pururavas, endowed, although a mortal, with the properties of a deity, 
governing the thirteen islands of the ocean, engaged in hostilities with the 
Brahmans in the pride of his strength, and seized their jewels, as they 
exclaimed against his oppression. Sanatkumara came from the sphere of 
Brahma to teach him the rules of duty, but Pururavas did not accept his 
instructions, and the king, deprived of understanding by the pride of his 
power, and actuated by avarice, was therefore ever accursed by the 
offended great sages, and was destroyed.' 





07. Chapter 


Sons of Pururavas. Descendants of Amavasu. Indra born as Gadhi. Legend of 
Richika and SatyavatL Birth of Jamadagni and Viswamitra. Parasurama the son 
of the former. (Legend of Parasurama.) Sunahsephas and others the sons of 
Viswamitra, forming the Kausika race. 

PURURAVAS had six sons, Ayus, Dhimat, Amavasu, Viswavasu, Satayus, and 
Srutayus. The son of Amavasu was Bhima his son was Kanchana his son was 
Suhotra, whose son was Jahnu. This prince, whilst performing a sacrifice, saw 
the whole of the place overflowed by the waters of the Ganges. Highly offended 
at this intrusion, his eyes red with anger, he united the spirit of sacrifice with 
himself, by the power of his devotion, and drank up the river. The gods and 
sages upon this came to him, and appeased his indignation, and reobtained 
Ganga from him, in the capacity of his daughter (whence she is called Jahnavi). 

The son of Jahnu was Sumantu his son was Ajaka; his son was Valakaswa his 
son was Kusa, who had four sons, Kusamba, Kusanabha, Amurttaya, and 
Amavasu. Kusamba, being desirous of a son, engaged in devout penance to 
obtain one who should be equal to Indra. Observing the intensity of his 
devotions, Indra was alarmed lest a prince of power like his own should be 
engendered, and determined therefore to take upon himself the character of 
Kusamba's son. He was accordingly born as Gadhi, of the race of Kusa 
(Kausika). Gadhi had a daughter named SatyavatL Richika, of the descendants of 
Bhrigu, demanded her in marriage. The king was very unwilling to give his 
daughter to a peevish old Brahman, and demanded of him, as the nuptial present, 
a thousand fleet horses, whose colour should be white, with one black ear. 
Richika having propitiated Varuria, the god of ocean, obtained from him, at the 
holy place called Aswatirtha, a thousand such steeds; and giving them to the 
king, espoused his daughter. 

In order to effect the birth of a son, Richika prepared a dish of rice, barley, and 
pulse, with butter and milk, for his wife to eat; and at her request he consecrated 
a similar mixture for her mother, by partaking of which she should give birth to a 
prince of martial prowess. Leaving both dishes with his wife, after describing 


particularly which was intended for her, and which for her mother, the sage went 
forth to the forests. When the time arrived for the food to be eaten, the queen 
said to Satyavati, "Daughter, all persons wish their children to be possessed of 
excellent qualities, and would be mortified to see them surpassed by the merits 
of their mother's brother. It will be desirable for you, therefore, to give me the 
mess your husband has set apart for you, and to eat of that intended for me; for 
the son which it is to procure me is destined to be the monarch of the whole 
world, whilst that which your dish would give you must be a Brahman, alike 
devoid of affluence, valour, and power." Satyavati agreed to her mother's 
proposal, and they exchanged messes. 

When Richika returned home, and beheld Satyavati, he said to her, "Sinful 
woman, what hast thou done! I view thy body of a fearful appearance. Of a 
surety thou hast eaten the consecrated food which was prepared for thy mother: 
thou hast done wrong. In that food I had infused the properties of power and 
strength and heroism; in thine, the qualities suited to a Brahman, gentleness, 
knowledge, and resignation. In consequence of having reversed my plans, thy 
son shall follow a warrior's propensities, and use weapons, and fight, and slay. 
Thy mother's son shall be born with the inclinations of a Brahman, and be 
addicted to peace and piety." Satyavati, hearing this, fell at her husband's feet, 
and said, "My lord, I have done this thing through ignorance; have compassion 
on me; let me not have a son such as thou hast foretold: if such there must be, let 
it be my grandson, not my son." The Muni, relenting at her distress, replied, "So 
let it be." Accordingly in due season she gave birth to Jamadagni; and her 
mother brought forth Viswamitra. Satyavati afterwards became the Kausiki river. 
Jamadagni married Reriuka, the daughter of Refill, of the family of Ikshwaku, 
and had by her the destroyer of the Kshatriya race, Parasurama, who was a 
portion of Narayaria, the spiritual guide of the universe. 


Footnotes 


01. Considerable variety prevails in these names, and the Matsya, Padma, 
Brahma, and Agni enumerate eight. The lists are as follows: 

ii ii ii ii ii ii 




Mahabharata. 

Matsya. 

Agni. 

Kurma. 

Bhagavata. 

Ayus 

Ayus 

Ayus 

Ayus 

Ayus 

Dhimat 

Dhritimat 

Dhimat 

Mayus 

Srutayus 

Amavasu 

Vasu 

Vasu 

Amayus 

Satyayus 

Dridhayus 

Dridhayus 

Usrayus 

Viswayus 

Raya 

Vanayus 

Dhanayus 

Antayus 

Satayus 

Vijaya 

Satayus 

Satayus 

Satayus 

Srutayus 

Jaya 


Aswayus 

Ritayus 




Divijata 

Divijata. 




The list of the Brahma is that of the Mahabharata, with the addition of 
Satayus and Viswayus; and the Padma agrees with the Matsya. 

02. Son of Vijaya: Bhagavata. This line of princes is followed only in our 
text, the Vayu, Brahma, and Hari V., and the Bhagavata. 

03. Kanchanaprabha: Brahma. 

04. Hotraka: Bhagavata. 

05. The Brahma P. and Hari V. add of this prince, that he was the husband of 
Kaveri, the daughter of Yuvanaswa, who by the imprecation of her 
husband became the Kaveri river: another indication of the Dakshina 
origin of these works. The Hari V. has another Jahnu, to whom it gives 
the same spouse, as we shall hereafter see. 

06. Sunuta: Brahma. Puru: Bhagavata. 

07. Valaka: Brahma. Ajaka: Bhagavata. 

08. The Brahma P. and Hari V. add that Kusa was in alliance with the 
Pahlavas and foresters. 

09. Our authorities differ as to these names: 


Vayu. 

Brahma and Hari V. 

Bhagavata. 

Kusaswa or, Kusasthamba 

Kusaswa 

Kusamba 

Kusanabha 

Kusanabha 

Kusanabha 

Amurttarayasa 

Amurttimat 

Amurttaraya 

Vasu 

Kusika 

Vasu. 





































































The Ramayana has Kusamba, Kusanabha, Amurttarayasa, and Vasu; and 
makes them severally the founders of Kausambi, of Mahodaya (which 
afterwards appears the same as Kanoj), Dharmarariya, and Girivraja; the 
latter being in the mountainous part of Magadha. I. s. 29. 

10. The Brahma and Hari V. make Gadhi the son of Kusika; the Vayu and 
Bhagavata, of Kusanaba; the Ramayana, of Kusanabha. 

11. The Ramayana notices the marriage, but has no legend. The 
Mahabharata, Vans R, has a rather more detailed narration, but much the 
same as in the text. According to the commentator, Aswatirtha is in the 
district of Kanoj; perhaps at the confluence of the Kalanadi with the 
Ganges. The agency of the god of Ocean in procuring horses, is a rather 
curious additional coincidence between Varuria and Neptune. 

12. In the Mahabharata, Bhrigu, the father of Richika, prepares the Charu. 

13. So the Ramayana, after stating that Satyavati followed her husband in 
death, adds, that she became the Kausiki river; the Cosi, which, rising in 
Nepal, flows through Puraniya into the Ganges, opposite nearly to 
Rajamahal. 

14. The text omits the story of Parasurama, but as the legend makes a great 
figure in the Vaishriava works in general, I have inserted it from the 
Mahabharata, where it is twice related, once in the Vana Parva, and once 
in the Rajadharma section of the Santi Parva. It is told also at length in 
the ninth book of the Bhagavata, in the Padma and Agni Purarias, &c. 




Legend Of Parasurama 


(From the Mahabharata.) 

"JAMADAGNI (the son of Richika) was a pious sage, who by the fervour of his 
devotions, whilst engaged in holy study, obtained entire possession of the Vedas. 
Having gone to king Prasenajit, he demanded in marriage his daughter Renuka, 
and the king gave her unto him. The descendant of Bhrigu conducted the 
princess to his hermitage, and dwelt with her there, and she was contented to 
partake in his ascetic life. They had four sons, and then a fifth, who was 
Jamadagnya, the last but not the least of the brethren, Once when her sons were 
all absent, to gather the fruits on which they fed, Renuka, who was exact in the 
discharge of all her duties, went forth to bathe. On her way to the stream she 
beheld Chitraratha, the prince of Mrittikavati, with a garland of lotuses on his 
neck, sporting with his queen in the water, and she felt envious of their felicity. 
Defiled by unworthy thoughts, wetted but not purified by the stream, she 
returned disquieted to the hermitage, and her husband perceived her agitation. 
Beholding her fallen from perfection, and shorn of the lustre of her sanctity, 
Jamadagni reproved her, and was exceeding wroth. Upon this there came her 
sons from the wood, first the eldest, Rumanwat, then Sushena, then Vasu, and 
then Viswavasu; and each, as he entered, was successively commanded by his 
father to put his mother to death; but amazed, and influenced by natural 
affection, neither of them made any reply: therefore Jamadagni was angry, and 
cursed them, and they became as idiots, and lost all understanding, and were like 
unto beasts or birds. Lastly, Rama returned to the hermitage, when the mighty 
and holy Jamadagni said unto him, 'Kill thy mother, who has sinned; and do it, 
son, without repining.' Rama accordingly took up his axe, and struck off his 
mother's head; whereupon the wrath of the illustrious and mighty Jamadagni was 
assuaged, and he was pleased with his son, and said, 'Since thou hast obeyed my 
commands, and done what was hard to be performed, demand from me whatever 
blessings thou wilt, and thy desires shall be all fulfilled.' Then Rama begged of 
his father these boons; the restoration of his mother to life, with forgetfulness of 
her having been slain, and purification from all defilement; the return of his 
brothers to their natural condition; and, for himself, invincibility in single 
combat, and length of days: and all these did his father bestow. 


"It happened on one occasion, that, during the absence of the Rishi's sons, the 
mighty monarch Karttavirya, the sovereign of the Haihaya tribe, endowed by the 
favour of Dattatreya with a thousand arms, and a golden chariot that went 
wheresoever he willed it to go, came to the hermitage of Jamadagni, where the 
wife of the sage received him with all proper respect. The king, inflated with the 
pride of valour, made no return to her hospitality, but carried off with him by 
violence the calf of the milch cow of the sacred oblation, and cast down the tall 
trees surrounding the hermitage. When Rama returned, his father told him what 
had chanced, and he saw the cow in affliction, and he was filled with wrath. 
Taking up his splendid bow, Bhargava, the slayer of hostile heroes, assailed 
Karttavirya, who had now become subject to the power of death, and overthrew 
him in battle. With sharp arrows Rama cut off his thousand arms, and the king 
perished. The sons of Karttavirya, to revenge his death, attacked the hermitage of 
Jamadagni, when Rama was away, and slew the pious and unresisting sage, who 
called repeatedly, but fruitlessly, upon his valiant son. They then departed; and 
when Rama returned, bearing fuel from the thickets, he found his father lifeless, 
and thus bewailed his unmerited fate: 'Father, in resentment of my actions have 
you been murdered by wretches as foolish as they are base! by the sons of 
Karttavirya are you struck down, as a deer in the forest by the huntsman's shafts! 
Ill have you deserved such a death; you who have ever trodden the path of 
virtue, and never offered wrong to any created thing! How great is the crime that 
they have committed, in slaying with their deadly shafts an old man like you, 
wholly occupied with pious cares, and engaging not in strife! Much have they to 
boast of to their fellows and their friends, that they have shamelessly slain a 
solitary hermit, incapable of contending in arms!' Thus lamenting, bitterly and 
repeatedly, Rama performed his father's last obsequies, and lighted his funeral 
pile. He then made a vow that he would extirpate the whole Kshatriya race. In 
fulfilment of this purpose he took up his arms, and with remorseless and fatal 
rage singly destroyed in fight the sons of Karttavirya; and after them, whatever 
Kshatriyas he encountered, Rama, the first of warriors, likewise slew. Thrice 
seven times did the clear the earth of the Kshatriya caste and he filled with their 
blood the five large lakes of Samanta-panchaka, from which he offered libations 
to the race of Bhrigu. There did he behold his sire again, and the son of Richika 
beheld his son, and told him what to do. Offering a solemn sacrifice to the king 
of the gods, Jamadagnya presented the earth to the ministering priests. To 
Kasyapa he gave the altar made of gold, ten fathoms in length, and nine in 



height. With the permission of Kasyapa, the Brahmans divided it in pieces 
amongst them, and they were thence called Kharidavayana Brahmans. Having 
given the earth to Kasyapa, the hero of immeasurable prowess retired to the 
Mahendra mountain, where he still resides: and in this manner was there enmity 
between him and the race of Kshatriyas, and thus was the whole earth conquered 
by Rama." 


The son of Viswamitra was Sunahsephas, the descendant of Bhrigu, given by the 
gods, and thence named Devarata. Viswamitra had other sons also, amongst 
whom the most celebrated were Madhuchhandas, Kritajaya, Devadeva, Ashtaka, 
Kachchapa, and Harita; these founded many families, all of whom were known 
by the name of Kausikas, and intermarried with the families of various Rishis. 


Footnotes 

01. The circumstances of Richika's marriage, and the birth of Jamadagni and 
Viswamitra, are told much in the same manner as in our text both in the 
Mahabharata and Bhagavata. 

02. In the beginning of the legend occurs the account of Karttaviryarjuna, 
with the addition that he oppressed both men and gods. The latter 
applying to Vishnu for succour, he descended to earth, and was born as 
Parasurama, for the especial purpose of putting the Haihaya king to 
death. 

03. In the Rajadharma the sons of the king carry off the calf. The Bhagavata 
makes the king seize upon the cow, by whose aid Jamadagni had 
previously entertained Arjuna and all his train: borrowing, no doubt, 
these embellishments from the similar legend of Vasishtha and 
Viswamitra, related in the Ramayaria. 

04. The characteristic weapon of Rama is however an axe (parasu), whence 
his name Rama, 'with the axe.' It was given to him by Siva, whom the 
hero propitiated on mount Gandhamadana. He at the same time received 
instruction in the use of weapons generally, and the art of war. Raja 
Dharma. 



05. This more than 'thrice slaying of the slain' is explained in the Rajadharma 
to mean, that he killed the men of so many generations, as fast as they 
grew up to adolescence. 

06. It is sometimes read Narotsedha, 'as high as a man.' 

07. The story, as told in the Rajadharma section, adds, that when Rama had 
given the earth to Kasyapa, the latter desired him to depart, as there was 
no dwelling for him in it, and to repair to the seashore of the south, where 
Ocean made for him (or relinquished to him) the maritime district named 
Surparaka. The traditions of the Peninsula ascribe the formation of the 
coast of Malabar to this origin, and relate that Parasurama compelled the 
ocean to retire, and introduced Brahmans and colonists from the north 
into Kerala or Malabar. According to some accounts he stood on the 
promontory of Dilli, and shot his arrows to the south, over the site of 
Kerala. It seems likely that we have proof of the local legend being at 
least as old as the beginning of the Christian era, as the mons Pyrrhus of 
Ptolemy is probably the mountain of Parasu or Parasurama. See 
Catalogue of Mackenzie Collection, Introd. p. xcv. and vol. II. The 
Rajadharma also gives an account of the Kshatriyas who escaped even 
the thrice seven times repeated destruction of their race. Some of the 
Haihayas were concealed by the earth as women; the son of Viduratha, of 
the race of Puru, was preserved in the Riksha mountain, where he was 
nourished by the bears; Sarvakarman, the son of Saudasa, was saved by 
Parasara, performing the offices of a Sudra; Gopati, son of Sivi, was 
nourished by cows in the forests; Vatsa, the son of Pratarddana, was 
concealed amongst the calves in a cow-pen; the son of Deviratha was 
secreted by Gautama on the banks of the Ganges; Vrihadratha was 
preserved in Gridhrakuta; and descendants of Marutta were saved by the 
ocean. From these the lines of kings were continued; but it does not 
appear from the ordinary lists that they were ever interrupted. This 
legend however, as well as that of the Ramayaria, b. I. c. 52, no doubt 
intimates a violent and protracted struggle between the Brahmans and 
Kshatriyas for supreme domination in India, as indeed the text of the 
Mahabharata more plainly denotes, as Earth is made to say to Kasyapa, 
'The fathers and grandfathers of these Kshatriyas have been killed by the 
remorseless Rama in warfare on my account.' 

08. The story of Sunahsephas is told by different authorities, with several 
variations. As the author of various Suktas in the Rich, he is called the 


son of Ajigartta. The Ramayana makes him the middle son of the sage 
Richika, sold to Ambarisha, king of Ayodhya, by his parents, to be a 
victim in a human sacrifice offered by that prince. He is set at liberty by 
Viswamitra, but it is not added that he was adopted. The Bhagavata 
concurs in the adoption, but makes Sunahsephas the son of Viswamitra's 
sister, by Ajigartta of the line of Bhrigu, and states his being purchased as 
a victim for the sacrifice of Harischandra. The Vayu makes him a son of 
Richika, but alludes to his being the victim at Harischandra's sacrifice. 
According to the Ramayana, Viswamitra called upon his sons to take the 
place of Sunahsephas, and on their refusing, degraded them to the 
condition of Charidalas. The Bhagavata says, that fifty only of the 
hundred sons of Viswamitra were expelled their tribe, for refusing to 
acknowledge Sunahsephas or Devarata as their elder brother. The others 
consented; and the Bhagavata expresses this; 'They said to the elder, 
profoundly versed in the Mantras, We are your followers:' as the 
commentator; ###. The Ramayana also observes, that Sunahsephas, when 
bound, praised Indra with Richas or hymns of the Rig-veda. The origin of 
the story therefore, whatever may be its correct version, must be referred 
to the Vedas; and it evidently alludes to some innovation in the ritual, 
adopted by a part only of the Kausika families of Brahmans. 

09. The Bhagavata says one hundred sons, besides Devarata and others, as 

r 

Ashtaka, Harita, &c. Much longer lists of names are given in the Vayu, 
Bhagavata, Brahma, and Hari V. The two latter specify the mothers. Thus 
Devasravas, Kati (the founder of the Katyayanas), and Hiranyaksha were 
sons of Silavati; Reriuka, Galava, Sankriti, Mudgala, Madhuchchandas, 

r 

and Devala were sons of Reriu; and Ashtaka, Kachchhapa, and Harita 
were the sons of Drishadvati. The same works enumerate the Gotras, the 
families or tribes of the Kausika Brahmans: these are, Parthivas, 
Devaratas, Yajnawalkyas, Samarshanas, Udumbaras, Dumlanas, 
Tarakayanas, Munchatas, Lohitas, Renus, Karishus, Babhrus, Paninas, 
Dhyanajyapyas, Syalantas, Hiranyakshas, Sankus, Galavas, Yamadutas, 
Devalas, Salankayanas, Bashkalas, Dadativadaras, Sausratas, 
Saindhavayanas, Nishriatas, Chunchulas, Salankrityas, Sankrityas, 
Vadaranyas, and an infinity of others, multiplied by intermarriages with 
other tribes, and who, according to the Vayu, were originally of the regal 
caste, like Viswamitra; but, like him, obtained Brahmanhood through 
devotion. Now these Gotras, or some of them at least, no doubt existed, 



partaking more of the character of schools of doctrine, but in which 
teachers and scholars were very likely to have become of one family by 
intermarrying; and the whole, as well as their original founder, imply the 
interference of the Kshatriya caste with the Brahmanical monopoly of 
religious instruction and composition. 




08. Chapter 


Sons of Ayus. Line of Kshatravriddha, or kings of Kasi. Former birth of 
Dhanwantari. Various names of Pratarddana. Greatness of Alarka. 

AYUS, the eldest son of Pururavas, married the daughter of Rahu (or Arahu), by 
whom he had five sons, Nahusha, Kshatravriddha, Rambha, Raji, and Anenas. 

The son of Kshatravriddha was Suhotra, who had three sons, Kasa, Lesa, and 
Ghritsamada. The son of the last was Saunaka, who first established the 
distinctions of the four castes. The son of Kasa was Kasiraja his son was 
Dirghatamas his son was Dhanwantari, whose nature was exempt from human 
infirmities, and who in every existence had been master of universal knowledge. 
In his past life (or when he was produced by the agitation of the milky sea), 
Narayaria had conferred upon him the boon, that he should subsequently be born 
in the family of Kasiraja, should compose the eightfold system of medical 
science, and should be thereafter entitled to a share of offerings made to the 
gods. The son of Dhanwantari was Ketumat; his son was Bhimaratha; his son 
was Divodasa his son was Pratarddana, so named from destroying the race of 
Bhadrasreriya. He had various other appellations, as Satrujit, 'the victor over his 
foes,' from having vanquished all his enemies; Vatsa, or 'child,' from his father's 
frequently calling him by that name; Ritadhwaja, 'he whose emblem was truth,' 
being a great observer of veracity; and Kuvalayaswa, because he had a horse 
(aswa) called Kuvalaya. The son of this prince was Alarka, of whom this verse is 
sung in the present day; "For sixty thousand and sixty hundred years no other 
youthful monarch except Alarka, reigned over the earth." The son of Alarka was 
Santati his son was Sunitha; his son was Suketu; his son was Dharmaketu; his 
son was Satyaketu; his son was Vibhu; his son was Suvibhu; his son was 
Sukumara; his son was Dhrishtaketu; his son was Vairiahotra; his son was 
Bharga; his son was Bhargabhumi; from whom also rules for the four castes 
were promulgated. These are the Kasya princes, or descendants of Kasa. We will 
now enumerate the descendants of Raji. 




Footnotes 


01. Dharmavriddha: Vayu. Vriddhasarman: Matsya. Yajnasarman: Padma. 

02. Darbha: Agni. Dambha: Padma. 

03. Vipapman: Agni and Matsya. Vidaman: Padma. The two last authorities 
proceed no farther with this line. 

04. Sunahotra: Vayu, Brahma. 

05. Kasya: Bhagavata. 

r r 

06. Sala: Vayu, Brahma, Hari V.: whose son was Arshtisena, father of 
Charanta; Vayu: of Kasyapa; Brahma and Hari V. 

07. Here is probably an error, for the Vayu, Bhagavata, and Brahma agree in 
making Sunaka the son of Ghritsamada, and father of Saunaka. 

08. The expression is 'The originator or causer of the distinctions (or duties) 
of the four castes.' The commentator, however, understands the 
expression to signify, that his descendants were of the four castes. So also 
the Vayu: 'The son of Ghritsamada was Sunaka, whose son was Saunaka. 
Brahmans, Kshatriyas, Vaisyas, and Sudras were born in his race; 
Brahmans by distinguished deeds.' The existence of but one caste in the 
age of purity, however incompatible with the legend which ascribes the 
origin of the four tribes to Brahma, is every where admitted. Their 
separation is assigned to different individuals, whether accurately to any 
one may be doubted; but the notion indicates that the distinction was of a 
social or political character. 

09. Kasiya: Brahma. 

_ r 

10. Dirghatapas: Vayu. Ghritsatamas: Agni. The Bhagavata inserts a Rashtra 
before this prince, and the Vayu a Dharma after him. 

11. The eight branches of medical science are, 1. Salya, extraction of 
extraneous bodies; 2. Salaka, treatment of external organic affections: 
these two constitute surgery: 3. Chikitsa, administration of medicines, or 
medical treatment in general; 4. Bhutavidya, treatment of maladies 
referred to demoniac possession; 5. Kaumarabhritya, midwifery and 
management of children; 6. Agada, alexipharmacy; 7. Rasayana, 
alchemical therapeutics; 8. Bajikararia, use of aphrodisiacs. Dhanwantari, 
according to the Brahma Vaivartta P., was preceded in medical science by 
Atreya, Bharadwaja, and Charaka: his pupil Susruta is the reputed author 
of a celebrated work still extant. It seems probable that Kasi or Benares 
was at an early period a celebrated school of medicine. 


12. Some rather curious legends are connected with this prince in the Vayu 
and Brahma Puranas, and Hari Vansa, and especially in the Kasi Khanda 
of the Skanda Purana. According to these authorities, Siva and Parvati, 
desirous of occupying Kasi, which Divodasa possessed, sent Nikumbha, 
one of the Ganas of the former, to lead the prince to the adoption of 
Buddhist doctrines; in consequence of which he was expelled from the 
sacred city, and, according to the Vayu, founded another on the banks of 
the Gomati. We have, however, also some singular, though obscure 
intimations of some of the political events of this and the succeeding 
reign. The passage of the Vayu is, 'The king Divodasa, having slain the 
hundred sons of Bhadrasrenya, took possession of his kingdom, which 
was conquered by that hero. The son of Bhadrasrenya, celebrated by the 
name of Durdama, was spared by Divodasa, as being an infant. 
Pratarddana was the son of Divodasa by Drishadvati; and by that great 
prince, desirous of destroying all enmity, (was recovered) that (territory) 
which had been seized by that young boy (Durdama).' This is not very 
explicit, and something is wanted to complete the sense. The Brahma P. 
and Hari V. tell the story twice over, chiefly in the words of the Vayu, but 
with some additions. In ch. 29. we have, first, the first three lines of the 
above extract; then comes the story of Benares being deserted; we then 
have the two next lines; then follow, 'That prince (Durdama) invading his 
patrimonial possessions, the territory which Divodasa had seized by force 
was recovered by the gallant son of Bhadhrasreriya, Durddama, a warrior 
desirous, mighty king, to effect the destruction of his foes.' Here the 
victory is ascribed to Durddama, in opposition to what appears to be the 
sense of the Vayu, and what is undoubtedly that of our text, which says 
that he was called Pratarddana from destroying the race of Bhadrasrenya, 
and Satrujit from vanquishing all his foes. By Vairasya anta, 'the end of 
hostility or enmity,' is obviously not to be understood here, as M. 
Langlois has intimated, a friendly pacification, but the end or destruction 
of all enemies. In the 32d chapter of the Hari Vansa we have precisely the 
same lines, slightly varied as to their order; but they are preceded by this 
verse; 'The city (that on the Gomati), before the existence of Benares, of 
Bhadrasrenya, a pious prince of the Yadu race: This verse is not in the 
Brahma P. After giving the rest of the above quotation, except the last 
line, the passage proceeds, 'The king called Ashtaratha was the son of 
Bhimaratha; and by him, great king, a warrior desirous of destroying his 


foes was (the country) recovered, the children (of Durdama) being 
infants.' According to the same authority, we are here to understand 

r 

Bhimaratha and Ashtaratha as epithets of Divodasa and Pratarddana. 
From these scanty and ill-digested notices it appears, that Divodasa, on 
being expelled from Benares, took some city and district on the Gomati 
from the family of Bhadrasreriya; that Durdama recovered the country, 
and that Pratarddana again conquered it from his descendants. The 
alternation concerned apparently only bordering districts, for the princes 
of Mahishmati and of Kasi continue, in both an earlier and a later series, 
in undisturbed possession of their capitals and their power. 

13. The Vayu, Agni, Brahma P., and Hari V. interpose two sons of 
Pratarddana, Garga or Bharga and Vatsa; and they make Vatsa the father 
of Alarka, except the Brahma, which has Satrujit and Ritadhwaja as two 
princes following Vatsa. 

14. The Vayu, Brahma, and Hari V. repeat this stanza, and add that Alarka 
enjoyed such protracted existence through the favour of Lopamudra, and 
that having lived till the period at which the curs upon terminated, he 
killed the Rakshas Kshemaka, by whom it had been occupied after it was 
abandoned by Divodasa, and caused the city to be reinhabited. The Hari 
V. agrees as usual with the Brahma, except in the reading of one or two 
names. It is to be observed, however, that the Agni makes the Kasi 
princes the descendants of Vitatha, the successor of Bharata. The Brahma 
P. and Hari V., determined apparently to be right, give the list twice over, 
deriving it in one place from Kshatravriddha, as in our text, the Vayu, 
and the Bhagavata; and in another, with the Agni, from Vitatha. The 
series of the Brahma, however, stops with Lauhi, the son of Alarka, and 
does not warrant the repetition which the carelessness of the compiler of 
the Hari Vansa has superfluously inserted. 

15. Several varieties occur, in the series that follows, as the comparative lists 
will best shew: 


Bhagavata. 

Brahma. 

Vayu. 

Agni. 

Alarka 

Alarka 

Alarka 

Alarka 

Santati 

Sannati 

Sannati 

Dharmaketu 

Sunitha 

Sunitha 

Sunitha 

Vibhu 

Suketana 

Kshema 

Suketu 

Sukumara 























Dharmaketu 

Ketumat 

r 

Dhrishtaketu 

Satyaketu 

Satyaketu 

Suketu 

Venuhotra 


r 

Dhrishtaketu 

Dharmaketu 

Gargya 


Sukumara 

Satyaketu 

Gargabhumi 


Vitihotra 

Vibhu 

Vatsabhumi 


Bharga 

Anartta 



Bhargabhumi 

Sukumara 




Dhrishtaketu 




Venuhotri 




Bharga 




Vatsabhumi. 




16. Our text is clear enough, and so is the Bhagavata, but the Vayu, Brahma, 
and Hari V. contain additions of rather doubtful import. The former has, 
'The son of Venuhotra was the celebrated Gargya; Gargabhumi was the 
son of Gargya; and Vatsa, of the wise Vatsa: virtuous Brahmans and 
Kshatriyas were the sons of these two.' By the second Vatsa is perhaps 
meant Vatsabhumi; and the purport of the passage is, that Gargya (or 
possibly rather Bharga, one of the sons of Pratarddana) and Vatsa were 
the founders of two races (Bhumi, 'earth,' implying 'source' or founder', 
who were Kshatriyas by birth, and Brahmans by profession. The Brahma 
and Hari V., apparently misunderstanding this text, have increased the 
perplexity. According to them, the son of Venuhotra was Bharga; 
Vatsabhumi was the son of Vatsa; and Bhargabhumi (Bhrigubhumi, 
Brahma) was from Bhargava. 'These sons of Angiras were born in the 
family of Bhrigu, thousands of great might, Brahmans, Kshatriyas and 
Vaisyas.' The commentator has, 'Another son of Vatsa, the father of 
Alarka, is described, Vatsabhumi, &c. From Bhargava, the brother of 
Vatsa. (They were) Angirasas from Galava belonging to that family, (and 
were born) in the family of Bhrigu from the descent of Viswamitra.' The 
interpretation is not very clear, but it authorizes the notion above 
expressed, that Vatsa and Bharga, the sons of Pratarddana, are the 
founders of two races of Kshatriya-Brahmans. 

17. On the subject of note 12. some farther illustration is derivable from the 
Mahabharata, Santi P. Dana-dharma. Haryaswa the king of the Kasis, 















































reigning between the Ganges and the Yamuna, or in the Do-ab, was 
invaded and slain by the Haihayas, a race descended, according to this 
authority, from Saryati, the son of Manu (see p. 358). Sudeva, the son of 
Haryaswa, was also attacked and defeated by the same enemies. 
Divodasa, his son, built and fortified Benares as a defence against the 
Haihayas, but in vain, for they took it, and compelled him to fly. He 
sought refuge with Bharadwaja, by whose favour he had a son born to 
him, Pratardana, who destroyed the Haihayas under their king Vitihavya, 
and reestablished the kingdom of Kasi. Vitihavya, through the protection 
of Bhrigu, became a Brahman. The Mahabharata gives a list of his 
descendants, which contains several of the names of the Kasya dynasty 
of the text; thus, Ghritsamada is said to be his son, and the two last of the 
line are Sunaka and Saunaka. See n. 7. 




09. Chapter 


Descendants of Raji, son of Ayus: Indra resigns his throne to him: claimed after 
his death by his sons, who apostatize from the religion of the Vedas, and are 
destroyed by Indra. Descendants of Pratikshatra, son of Kshatravriddha. 

RAJI had five hundred sons, all of unequalled daring and vigour. Upon the 
occurrence of a war between the demons and the gods, both parties inquired of 
Brahma which would be victorious. The deity replied, "That for which Raji shall 
take up arms." Accordingly the Daityas immediately repaired to Raji, to secure 
his alliance; which he promised them, if they would make him their Indra after 
defeating the gods. To this they answered and said, "We cannot profess one 
thing, and mean another; our Indra is Prahlada, and it is for him that we wage 
war." Having thus spoken, they departed; and the gods then came to him on the 
like errand. He proposed to them the said conditions, and they agreed that he 
should be their Indra. Raji therefore joined the heavenly host, and by his 
numerous and formidable weapons destroyed the army of their enemies. 

When the demons were discomfited, Indra placed the feet of Raji upon his head, 
and said, "Thou hast preserved me from a great danger, and I acknowledge thee 
as my father; thou art the sovereign chief over all the regions, and I, the Indra of 
the three spheres, am thy son." The Raja, smiled, and said, "Even be it so. The 
regard that is conciliated by many agreeable speeches is not to be resisted even 
when such language proceeds from a foe (much less should the kind words of a 
friend fail to win our affection)." He accordingly returned to his own city, and 
Indra remained as his deputy in the government of heaven. 

When Raji ascended to the skies, his sons, at the instigation of Narada, 
demanded the rank of Indra as their hereditary right; and as the deity refused to 
acknowledge their supremacy, they reduced him to submission by force, and 
usurped his station. After some considerable time had elapsed, the god of a 
hundred sacrifices, Indra, deprived of his share of offerings to the immortals, met 
with Vrihaspati in a retired place, and said to him, "Cannot you give me a little 
of the sacrificial butter, even if it were no bigger than a jujube, for I am in want 
of sustenance?" "If," replied Vrihaspati, "I had been applied to by you before, I 


could have done any thing for you that you wished; as it is, I will endeavour and 
restore you in a few days to your sovereignty." So saying, he commenced a 
sacrifice for the purpose of increasing the might of Indra, and of leading the sons 
of Raji into error, and so effecting their downfall. Misled by their mental 
fascination, the princes became enemies of the Brahmans, regardless of their 
duties, and contemners of the precepts of the Vedas; and thus devoid of morality 
and religion, they were slain by Indra, who by the assistance of the priest of the 
gods resumed his place in heaven. Whoever hears this story shall retain for ever 
his proper place, and shall never be guilty of wicked acts. 

Rambha, the third son of Ayus, had no progeny. Kshatravriddha had a son 
named Pratikshatra his son was Sanjaya; his son was Vijaya his son was 
Yajnakrit his son was Harshavarddhana his son was Sahadeva; his son was 
Adina his son was Jayasena; his son was Sankriti; his son was Kshatradharman. 
These were the descendants of Kshatravriddha. I will now mention those of 
Nahusha. 




Footnotes 

01. The Matsya says he taught the sons of Raji the Jinadharma or Jain 
religion. 

02. The Bhagavata enumerates however, as his descendants, Rabhasa, 
Gambhira, and Akriya, whose posterity became Brahmans. The same 
authority gives as the descendants of Anenas, the fourth son of Ayus, 
Suddha, Suchi, Trikakud, and Santakhya. 

03. The Vayu agrees with our text in making Pratipaksha (Pratikshatra) the 
son of Kshattravriddha; but the Brahma P. and Hari V. consider Anenas 
to be the head of this branch of the posterity of Ayus. The Bhagavata 
substitutes Kusa, the Lesa, of our text, the grandson of Kshatravriddha, 
for the first name; and this seems most likely to be correct. Although the 
different MSS. agree in reading ### it should be perhaps ### the 
patronymic Kshatravriddha; making then, as the Bhagavata does, 
Pratikshatra the son of the son of Kshatravriddha. 

04. Jaya: Bhagavata, Vayu. 




05. Vijaya: Vayu. Krita: Bhagavata, 

06. Haryaswa: Brahma, Hari V. Haryavana: Bhagavata. 
07. The last of the list: Vayu. Ahlna: Bhagavata. 

08. Kshatravriddha: Brahma, Hari V. 




10. Chapter 


The sons of Nahusha. The sons of Yayati: he is cursed by Sukra: wishes his sons 
to exchange their vigour for his infirmities. Puru alone consents. Yayati restores 
him his youth: divides the earth amongst his sons, under the supremacy of Puru. 

YATI, Yayati, Sanyati, Ayati, Viyati, and Kriti were the six valiant sons of 
Nahusha. Yati declined the sovereignty, and Yayati therefore succeeded to the 

r r 

throne. He had two wives, Devayani the daughter of Usanas, and Sarmishtha the 
daughter of Vrishaparvan; of whom this genealogical verse is recited: "Devayani 
bore two sons, Yadu and Turvasu. Sarmishtha, the daughter of Vrishaparvan, had 
three sons, Druhyu, Anu, and Puru." Through the curse of Usanas, Yayati 
became old and infirm before his time; but having appeased his father-in-law, he 
obtained permission to transfer his decrepitude to any one who would consent to 
take it. He first applied to his eldest son Yadu, and said, "Your maternal 
grandfather has brought this premature decay upon me: by his permission, 
however, I may transfer it to you for a thousand years. I am not yet satiate, with 
worldly enjoyments, and wish to partake of them through the means of your 
youth. Do not refuse compliance with my request." Yadu, however, was not 
willing to take upon him his father's decay; on which his father denounced an 
imprecation upon him, and said, "Your posterity shall not possess dominion." He 
then applied successively to Druhyu, Turvasu, and Anu, and demanded of them 
their juvenile vigour. They all refused, and were in consequence cursed by the 
king. Lastly he made the same request of Sarmishtha's youngest son, Puru, who 
bowed to his father, and readily consented to give him his youth, and receive in 
exchange Yayati's infirmities, saying that his father had conferred upon him a 
great favour. 

The king Yayati being thus endowed with renovated youth, conducted the affairs 
of state for the good of his people, enjoying such pleasures as were suited to his 
age and strength, and were not incompatible with virtue. He formed a connexion 
with the celestial nymph Viswachi, and was wholly attached to her, and 
conceived no end to his desires. The more they were gratified, the more ardent 
they became; as it is said in this verse, "Desire is not appeased by enjoyment: 
fire fed with sacrificial oil becomes but the more intense. No one has ever more 


than enough of rice, or barley, or gold, or cattle, or women: abandon therefore 
inordinate desire. When a mind finds neither good nor ill in all objects, but looks 
on all with an equal eye, then every thing yields it pleasure. The wise man is 
filled with happiness, who escapes from desire, which the feeble minded can 
with difficulty relinquish, and which grows not old with the aged. The hair 
becomes grey, the teeth fall out, as man advances in years; but the love of 
wealth, the love of life, are not impaired by age." "A thousand years have 
passed," reflected Yayati, "and my mind is still devoted to pleasure: every day 
my desires are awakened by new objects. I will therefore now renounce all 
sensual enjoyment, and fix my mind upon spiritual truth. Unaffected by the 
alternatives of pleasure and pain, and having nothing I may call my own, I will 
henceforth roam the forests with the deer." 

Having made this determination, Yayati restored his youth to Puru, resumed his 
own decrepitude, installed his youngest son in the sovereignty, and departed to 
the wood of penance (Tapovana). To Turvasu he consigned the south-east 
districts of his kingdom; the west to Druhyu; the south to Yadu; and the north to 
Anu; to govern as viceroys under their younger brother Puru, whom he 
appointed supreme monarch of the earth. 


Footnotes 

1. The Bhagavata refers briefly to the story of Nahusha, which is told in the 
Mahabharata more than once, in the Vana Parva, Udyoga P., Dana Dharma P., 
and others; also in the Padma and other Puranas. He had obtained the rank of 
Indra; but in his pride, or at the suggestion of Sachi, compelling the Rishis to 
bear his litter, he was cursed by them to fall from his state, and reappear upon 
earth as a serpent. From this form he was set free by philosophical discussions 
with Yudhishthira, and received final liberation. Much speculation, wholly 
unfounded, has been started by Wilford's conjecture that the name of this 
prince, with Deva, 'divine,' prefixed, a combination which never occurs, was 
the same as Dionysius or Bacchus. Authorities generally agree as to the names 
of the first three of his sons: in those of the others there is much variety, and 
the Matsya, Agni, and Padma have seven names, as follows omitting the three 


first of the text: 


Matsya. 

Agni. 

Padma. 

Linga. 

Udbhava 

Udbhava 

Udbhava 

Saryati 

Panschi 

Panchaka 

Pava 

Champaka 

Sunyati 

Palaka 

Viyati 

Andhaka 

Meghayati 

Megha 

Meghayati 



2. Or, as his name implies, he became a devotee, a Yati: Bhagavata, &c. 

3. The story is told in great detail in the Adi Parvan of the Mahabharata, also 

r r 

in the Bhagavata, with some additions evidently of a recent taste. Sarmishtha, 
the daughter of Vrishaparvan, king of the Daityas, having quarrelled with 
Devayani, the daughter of Sukra (the religious preceptor of the same race), 
had her thrown into a well. Yayati, hunting in the forest, found her, and taking 
her to her father, with his consent espoused her. Devayani, in resentment of 

r r 

Sarmishtha's treatment, demanded that she should become her handmaid; and 
Vrishaparvan, afraid of Sukra's displeasure, was compelled to comply. In the 
service of his queen, however, Yayati beheld Sarmishtha, and secretly wedded 
her. Devayani complaining to her father of Yayati's infidelity, Sukra inflicted 
on him premature decay, with permission to transfer it to any one willing to 
give him youth and strength in exchange, as is related in the text. The passage 
specifying the sons of Yayati is precisely the same in the Mahabharata as in 
our text, and is introduced in the same way. 

4. Bhrigutunga, according to the Brahma. 

5. The elder brothers were made Maridala-nripas, kings of circles or districts: 
Bhagavata. The situation of their governments is not exactly agreed upon. 



Vayu and Padma. 

Brahma and Hari V. 

Bhagavata 

Turvasu 

South-east 

South-east 

West 

Druhyu 

West 

West 

South-east 

Yadu 

South-west 

South 

South 

Anu 

North 

North' 

Nort 
















































The Linga describes the ministers and people as expostulating with Yayati, for 
illegally giving the supremacy to the youngest son; but he satisfies them by 
shewing that he was justified in setting the seniors aside, for want of filial 
duty. The Mahabharata, Udyoga P. Galava Charitra, has a legend of Yayati's 
giving a daughter to the saint Galava, who through her means obtains from 
different princes eight hundred horses, white with one black ear, as a fee for 
his preceptor Viswamitra. Yayati, after his death and residence in Indra's 
heaven, is again descending to earth, when his daughter's sons give him the 
benefit of their devotions, and replace him in the celestial sphere. It has the air 
of an old story. A legend in some respects similar has been related in our text. 




11. Chapter 


The Yadava race, or descendants of Yadu. Karttavirya obtains a boon from 
Dattatreya: takes Ravana prisoner: is killed by Parasurama: his descendants. 

I WILL first relate to you the family of Yadu, the eldest son of Yayati, in which 
the eternal immutable Vishnu descended upon earth in a portion of his essence of 
which the glory cannot be described, though for ever hymned in order to confer 
the fruit of all their wishes—whether they desired virtue, wealth, pleasure, or 
liberation—upon all created beings, upon men, saints, heavenly quiristers, spirits 
of evil, nymphs, centaurs, serpents, birds, demons, gods, sages, Brahmans, and 
ascetics. Whoever hears the account of the race of Yadu shall be released from 
all sin; for the supreme spirit, that is without form, and which is called Vishnu, 
was manifested in this family. 

r r 

Yadu had four sons, Sahasrajit, Kroshti, Nala, and Raghu. Satajit was the son of 
the elder of these, and he had three sons, Haihaya, Veriu, and Haya. The son of 
Haihaya was Dharmanetra his son was Kunti his son was Sahanji his son was 
Mahishmat his son was Bhadrasena his son was Durdama; his son was Dhanaka, 
who had four sons, Kritaviryya, Kritagni, Kritavarman, and Kritaujas. 
Kritaviryya's son was Arjuna, the sovereign of the seven Dwipas, the lord of a 
thousand arms. This prince propitiated the sage Dattatreya, the descendant of 
Atri, who was a portion of Vishnu, and solicited and obtained from him these 
boons—a thousand arms; never acting unjustly; subjugation of the world by 
justice, and protecting it equitably; victory over his enemies; and death by the 
hands of a person renowned in the three regions of the universe. With these 
means he ruled over the whole earth with might and justice, and offered ten 
thousand sacrifices. Of him this verse is still recited; "The kings of the earth will 
assuredly never pursue his steps in sacrifice, in munificence, in devotion, in 
courtesy, and in self-control." In his reign nothing was lost or injured; and so he 
governed the whole earth with undiminished health, prosperity, power, and 
might, for eighty five thousand years. Whilst sporting in the waters of the 
Narmada, and elevated with wine, Ravana came on his tour of triumph to the 
city Mahishmati, and there he who boasted of overthrowing the gods, the 
Daityas, the Gandharbas and their king, was taken prisoner by Karttavirya, and 


confined like a tame beast in a corner of his capital. At the expiration of his long 
reign Karttavirya was killed by Parasurama, who was an embodied portion of the 
mighty Narayaria. Of the hundred sons of this king, the five principal were Sura, 
Surasena, Vrisharia, Madhu, and Jayadhwaja. The son of the last was Talajangha, 
who had a hundred sons, called after him Talajanghas: the eldest of these was 
Vitihotra; another was Bharata, who had two sons, Vrisha and Sujati. The son of 
Vrisha was Madhu he had a hundred sons, the chief of whom was Vrishhi, and 
from him the family obtained the name of Vrishhi. From the name of their father, 
Madhu, they were also called Madhavas; whilst from the denomination of their 
common ancestor Yadu, the whole were termed Yadavas. 


Footnotes 

01. Or, 'in which Krishna was born.' It might have been expected, from the 
importance of this genealogy, that it would have been so carefully 
preserved, that the authorities would have closely concurred in its details. 
Although, however, the leading specifications coincide, yet, as we shall 
have occasion to notice, great and irreconcilable variations occur. 

02. The two first generally agree. There are differences in the rest; as, 


Vayu. 

Brahma. 

Bhagavata. 

Kurma. 

Nila 

Nala 

Nala 

Nila 

Ajita 

Anjika 

Aripu 

Jina 

Raghu 

Payoda 

Aripu 

Raghu 


The Brahma and Hari V. read Sahasrada for the first name; and the Linga 
has Balasani in place of Nala. The Agni makes Satajit also a son of Yadu. 
03. Veriuhaya: Bhagavata, &c. Uttanahaya: Padma. Vettahaya: Matsya. They 
were the sons of Sahasrada: Brahma and Hari V. 

04. Dharmatantra: Vayu. Dharma: Kurma. 

05. Kirtti: Vayu. 

06. Sanjneya: Vayu. Sankana: Agni. Sahanja of Sahanjani pura: Brahma. 
Sanjnita: Linga. Sanhana: Matsya. Sohanji: Bhagavata. 






















07. By whom the city of Mahishmati on the Narbadda was founded: Brahma 
P., Hari V. 

08. So the Bhagavata; but the Vayu, more correctly, has Bhadrasreriya. 

09. Kanaka: Vayu, &c. Varaka: Linga. Andhaka: Kurma. 

10. According to the Vayu, Karttavirya was the aggressor, invading Lanka, 
and there taking Ravaria prisoner. The circumstances are more usually 
narrated as in our text. 

11. See page 402. Karttavirya's fate was the consequence of an imprecation 
denounced by Apava or Vasishtha, the son of Varuria, whose hermitage 
had been burnt, according to the Mahabharata, Raja-dharma, by 
Chitrabhanu, or Fire, to whom the king had in his bounty presented the 
world. The Vayu makes the king himself the incendiary, with arrows 
given him by Surya to dry up the ocean. 

12. Urjjita: Bhagavata. 

r 

13. Vrishabha: Bhagavata. Dhrishta: Matsya. Dhrishria: Kurma. Prishokta: 
Padma. Vrishni: Linga. Krishnaksha: Brahma. 

14. Krishna, in all except the Bhagavata. 

15. King of Avanti: Brahma and Hari Vansa. 

16. Ananta: Vayu and Agni; elsewhere omitted. 

17. Durjaya only: Vayu, Matsya. 

18. This Madhu, according to the Bhagavata, was the son of Karttavirya. The 
Brahma and Hari V. make him the son of Vrisha, but do not say whose 
son Vrisha was. The commentator on the latter asserts that the name is a 
synonyme of Payoda, the son of Yadu, according to his authority, and to 
that alone. 

19. The Bhagavata agrees with our text, but the Brahma, Hari V., Linga, and 
Kurma make Vrishana the son of Madhu, and derive the family name of 
Vrishriis or Varshneyas from him. 

20. The text takes no notice of some collateral tribes, which appear to merit 
remark. Most of the other authorities, in mentioning the sons of 
Jayadhwaja, observe that from them came the five great divisions of the 
Haihaya tribe. These, according to the Vayu, were the Talajanghas, 

r r 

Vitihotras, Avantyas, Turidikeras, and Jatas. The Matsya and Agni omit 
the first, and substitute Bhojas; and the latter are included in the list in 
the Brahma, Padma, Linga, and Hari V. For Jatas the reading is Sanjatas 
or Sujatas. The Brahma P. has also Bharatas, who, as well as the Sujatas, 
are not commonly specified, it is said, 'from their great number.' They are 


in all probability invented by the compiler out of the names of the text, 
Bharata and Sujati. The situation of these tribes is central India, for the 
capital of the Talajanghas was Mahishmati or Chuli-Maheswar, still 
called, according to Col. Tod, Sahasra-bahuki-basti, 'the village of the 
thousand-armed;' that is, of Karttaviryya. Annals of Rajasthan, I. 39. n. 
The Turidikeras and Vitihotras are placed in the geographical lists behind 
the Vindhyan mountains, and the termination -kaira is common in the 
valley of the Narmada, as Bairkaira, &c., or we may have Turidikera 

r r 

abbreviated, as Turidari on the Tapti. The Avantyas were in Ujayin, and 
the Bhojas were in the neighbourhood probably of Dhar in Malwa. These 
tribes must have preceded, then, the Rajput tribes, by whom these 
countries are now occupied, or Rahtores, Chauhans, Pawars, Gehlotes, 
and the rest. There are still some vestiges of them, and a tribe of 
Haihayas still exists, at the top of the valley of Sohagpur in Bhagel- 
kharid, aware of their ancient lineage, and though few in number, 
celebrated for their valour. Tod's Rajasthan, I. 39. The scope of the 
traditions regarding them, especially of their overrunning the country, 
along with Sakas and other foreign tribes, in the reign preceding that of 
Sagara, indicates their foreign origin also; and if we might trust to verbal 
resemblances, we might suspect that the Hayas and Haihayas of the 
Hindus had some connexion with the Hia, Hoiei-ke, Hoiei-hu, and 
similarly denominated Hun or Turk tribes, who make a figure in Chinese 
history. Des Guignes, Histoire des Huns, I. 7, 55, 231. II. 253, &c. At the 
same time it is to be observed that these tribes do not make their 
appearance until some centuries after the Christian era, and the scene of 
their first exploits is far from the frontiers of India: the coincidence of 
appellation may be therefore merely accidental. In the word Haya, which 
properly means 'a horse,' it is not impossible, however, that we have a 
confirmatory evidence of the Scythian origin of the Haihayas, as Col. 
Tod supposed; although we cannot with him imagine the word 'horse' 
itself is derived from haya. Rajasthan, I. 76. 




12. Chapter 


r r 

Descendants of Kroshtri. Jyamagha's connubial affection for his wife Saivya: 
their descendants kings of Vidarbha and Chedi. 

r 

KROSHTRI, the son of Yadu, had a son named Vrijinivat his son was Swahi his 
son was Rushadru his son was Chitraratha; his son was Sasavindu, who was lord 
of the fourteen great gems he had a hundred thousand wives and a million of 
sons. The most renowned of them were Prithuyasas, Prithukarman, Prithujaya, 
Prithukirtti, Prithudana, and Prithusravas. The son of the last of these six was 
Tamas his son was Usanas, who celebrated a hundred sacrifices of the horse; his 
son was Siteyus his son was Rukmakavacha his son was Paravrit, who lead five 
sons, Rukmeshu, Prithurukman, Jyamagha, Palita, and Harita. To this day the 
following verse relating to Jyamagha is repeated: "Of all the husbands 
submissive to their wives, who have been or who will be, the most eminent is the 
king Jyamagha, who was the husband of Saivya." Saivya was barren; but 
Jyamagha was so much afraid of her, that he did not take any other wife. On one 
occasion the king, after a desperate conflict with elephants and horse, defeated a 
powerful foe, who abandoning wife, children, kin, army, treasure, and dominion, 
fled. When the enemy was put to flight, Jyamagha beheld a lovely princess left 
alone, and exclaiming, "Save me, father! Save me, brother!" as her large eyes 
rolled wildly with affright. The king was struck by her beauty, and penetrated 
with affection for her, and said to himself, "This is fortunate; I have no children, 
and am the husband of a sterile bride; this maiden has fallen into my hands to 
rear up to me posterity: I will espouse her; but first I will take her in my car, and 
convey her to my palace, where I must request the concurrence of the queen in 
these nuptials." Accordingly he took the princess into his chariot, and returned to 
his own capital. 

When Jyamagha's approach was announced, Saivya came to the palace gate, 
attended by the ministers, the courtiers, and the citizens, to welcome the 
victorious monarch: but when she beheld the maiden standing on the left hand of 
the king, her lips swelled and slightly quivered with resentment, and she said to 
Jyamagha, "Who is this light-hearted damsel that is with you in the chariot?" 
The king unprepared with a reply, made answer precipitately, through fear of his 


queen; "This is my daughter-in-law." "I have never had a son," rejoined Saivya, 
"and you have no other children. Of what son of yours then is this girl the wife?" 
The king disconcerted by the jealousy and anger which the words of Saivya 
displayed, made this reply to her in order to prevent further contention; "She is 
the young bride of the future son whom thou shalt bring forth." Hearing this, 
Saivya smiled gently, and said, "So be it;" and the king entered into his great 
palace. 

In consequence of this conversation regarding the birth of a son having taken 
place in an auspicious conjunction, aspect, and season, the queen, although 
passed the time of women, became shortly afterwards pregnant, and bore a son. 
His father named him Vidarbha, and married him to the damsel he had brought 
home. They had three sons, Kratha, Kaisika, and Romapada. The son of 
Romapada was Babhru, and his son was Dhriti. The son of Kaisika was Chedi, 
whose descendants were called the Chaidya kings. The son of Kratha was Kunti 
his son was Vrishrii his son was Nirvriti his son was Dasarha; his son was 
Vyoman; his son was Jimuta; his son was Vikriti his son was Bhimaratha; his son 
was Navaratha his son was Dasaratha his son was Sakuni; his son was 
Karambhi; his son was Devarata; his son was Devakshatra his son was Madhu 
his son was Anavaratha; his son was Kuruvatsa; his son was Anuratha; his son 
was Puruhotra; his son was Ansu; his son was Satwata, from whom the princes 
of this house were termed Satwatas. This was the progeny of Jyamagha; by 
listening to the account of whom, a man is purified from his sins. 


Footnotes 

r 

01. In the Brahma P. and Hari V. we have two families from Kroshtri; one 
which is much the same as that of the text; the other makes short work of 
a long story, as we shall again notice. 

02. Vajravat: Kurma. 

03. Santi: Kurma. Swaha: Matsya. Trisanku Linga. 

04. Vishansu: Agni. Rishabha: Linga. Kusika: Kurma. Ruseku: Bhagavata. 

05. Or articles the best of their kind; seven animate, and seven inanimate; a 
wife, a priest, a general, a charioteer, a horse, an elephant, and a body of 


foot soldiers; or, instead of the last three, an executioner, an encomiast, a 
reader of the Vedas; and a chariot, an umbrella, a jewel, a sword, a shield, 
a banner, and a treasure. 

06. The text states this in plain prose, but the Vayu quotes a verse which 
makes out but a hundred hundred or 10,000 sons. 

07. The Matsya has the first, third, and fifth of our text, and Prithudharma, 
Prithukirtti, and Prithumat. The Kurina has also six names, but makes as 
many successions. 

08. Suyajna: Agni, Brahma, Matsya. Dharma: Bhagavata. 

09. Ushat: Brahma, Hari V. 

10. Sitikshu: Agni. Sineyus: Brahma. Purujit: Bhagavata. The Vayu has 
Maruta and Kambalavarhish, brothers, instead. 

11. Considerable variety prevails here. The Brahma and Hari V. have 
Marutta the Rajarshi (a gross blunder), Kambalavarhish, Sataprasuti, 
Rukmakavacha: the Agni—Marutta, Kambalavarhish, Rukmeshu: whilst 
the Bhagavata makes Ruchaka son of Usanas, and father to the five 
princes who in the text are the grandsons of Rukmakavacha. 

12. The Bhagavata has Rukmeshu, Rukman, Jyamagha, Prithu, and Purujit. 
The Vayu reads the two last names Parigha and Hari. The Brahma and 
Hari V. insert Parajit as the father of the five named as in the text. 

13. Most of the other authorities mention that the elder of the five brothers, 
Rukmeshu, succeeded his father in the sovereignty; and that the second, 
Prithurukman, remained in his brother's service. Palita and Harita were 
set over Videha (Linga) or Tirhut, and Jyamagha went forth to settle 
where he might: according to the Vayu he conquered Madhyadesa (the 
country along the Narmada), Mekala, and the Suktimat mountains. So the 
Brahma P. states that he established himself along the Rikshavat 
mountain, and dwelt in Suktimati. He names his son, as we shall see, 
Vidarbha: the country so called is Berar, and amongst his descendants we 
have the Chaidyas or princes of Boghelkand, and Chandail, and Dasarha, 
more correctly perhaps Dasarha, Chattisgher; so that this story of 
Jyamagha's adventures appears to allude to the first settlement of the 
Yadava tribes along the Narmada, more to the south and west than 
before. 

14. The Bhagavata has Kusa; the Matsya, Kausika: all the authorities agree 
in specifying three sons. 

15. Lomapada: Agni. 


16. Vastu: Vayu. Kriti: Agni. 

17. Ahuti: Vayu. Iti: Padma. Dyuti: Matsya. Bhriti: Kurma. This latter is 
singular in carrying on the line of Romapada for twelve generations 
farther. 

18. The Bhagavata, however, makes the princes of Chedi continuous from 
Romapada; as, Babhru, Dhriti, Usika, Chedi—the Chaidyas, amongst 
whom were Damaghosha and Sisupala. 

19. Kumbhi: Padma. 

r r 

20. Dhrishta: Vayu. Dhrishti: Matsya, 

21. Nivritti: Vayu. Nidhriti: Agni. The Brahma makes three sons, Avanta, 
Dasarha, and Balivrishahan. In the Linga it is said of Dasarha that he was 
'destroyer of the host of copper (faced; European?) foes.' 

22. Vikala: Matsya. 

23. Nararatha: Brahma, Hari V. 

24. Dridharatha: Agni. Devarata: Linga. 

25. Soma: Linga. Devanakshatra: Padma. 

26. There is great variety in the succeeding appellations: 


Bhagavata. 

Vayu. 

Brahma. 

Matsya. 

Padma. 

Kurma. 

Madhu 

Madhu 

Madhu 

Madhu 

Madhu 

Madhu 

Kuruvasa 

Manu 

Manavasas 

Uruvas 

Puru 

Kuru 

Anu 

Puruvatsa 

Purudwat 

Purudwat 

Punarvasu 

Anu 

Puruhotra 

Ayu 

Purudwat 

Satwa 

Madhu and 
Satwa 

Jantu 

Jantu 

Ansa 

Satwata 

Satwata 

Satwata 

Satwata 

Satwata 

Andhaka 

Satwata 


The Linga has Purushaprabhu, Manwat, Pratarddana, Satwata; and the 
Agni, Dravavasu, Puruhuta, Jantu, and Satwata. Some of these originate, 
no doubt, in the blunders of copyists, but they cannot all be referred to 
that source. 




































13. Chapter 


Sons of Satwata. Bhoja princes of Mrittikavati. Surya the friend of Satrajit: 
appears to him in a bodily form: gives him the Syamantaka gem: its brilliance 
and marvellous properties. Satrajit gives it to Prasena, who is killed by a lion: the 
lion killed by the bear Jambavat. Krishna suspected of killing Prasena, goes to 
look for him in the forests: traces the bear to his cave: fights with him for the 
jewel: the contest prolonged: supposed by his companions to be slain: he 
overthrows Jambavat, and marries his daughter Jambavati: returns with her and 
the jewel to Dwaraka: restores the jewel to Satrajit, and marries his daughter 
Satyabhama. Satrajit murdered by Satadhanwan: avenged by Krishna. Quarrel 
between Krishna and Balarama. Akrura possessed of the jewel: leaves Dwaraka. 
Public calamities. Meeting of the Yadavas. Story of Akrura's birth: he is invited 
to return: accused by Krishna of having the Syamantaka jewel: produces it in full 
assembly: it remains in his charge: Krishna acquitted of having purloined it. 

THE sons of Satwata were Bhajina, Bhajamana, Divya, Andhaka, Devavriddha, 
Mahabhoja, and Vrishni. Bhajamana had three sons, Nimi, Krikana, and Vrishni, 
by one wife, and as many by another, Satajit, Sahasrajit, and Ayutajit. The son of 
Devavriddha was Babhru of whom this verse is recited; "We hear when afar, and 
we behold when nigh, that Babhru is the first of men, and Devavriddha is equal 
to the gods: sixty-six persons following the precepts of one, and six thousand 
and eight who were disciples of the other, obtained immortality." Mahabhoja was 
a pious prince; his descendants were the Bhojas, the princes of Mrittikavati, 
thence called Marttikavatas. Vrishni had two sons, Sumitra and Yudhajit from 
the former Anamitra and Sini were born. The son of Anamitra was Nighna, who 
had two sons, Prasena and Satrajit. The divine Aditya, the sun, was the friend of 
the latter. 

On one occasion Satrajit, whilst walking along the sea shore, addressed his mind 
to Surya, and hymned his praises; on which the divinity appeared and stood 
before him. Beholding him in an indistinct shape, Satrajit said to the sun, "I have 
beheld thee, lord, in the heavens as a globe of fire: now do thou shew favour 
unto me, that I may see thee in thy proper form." On this the sun taking the jewel 
called Syamantaka from off his neck, placed it apart, and Satrajit beheld him of a 


dwarfish stature, with a body like burnished copper, and with slightly reddish 
eyes. Having offered his adorations, the sun desired him to demand a boon, and 
he requested that the jewel might become his. The sun presented it to him, and 
then resumed his place in the sky. Having obtained the spotless gem of gems, 
Satrajit wore it on his neck, and becoming as brilliant thereby as the sun himself, 
irradiating all the region with his splendour, he returned to Dwaraka. The 
inhabitants of that city, beholding him approach, repaired to the eternal male, 
Purushottama, who, to sustain the burden of the earth, had assumed a mortal 
form (as Krishna), and said to him, "Lord, assuredly the divine sun is coming to 
visit you." But Krishna smiled, and said, "It is not the divine sun, but Satrajit, to 
whom Aditya has presented the Syamantaka gem, and he now wears it: go and 
behold him without apprehension." Accordingly they departed. Satrajit having 
gone to his house, there deposited the jewel, which yielded daily eight loads of 
gold, and through its marvellous virtue dispelled all fear of portents, wild beasts, 
fire, robbers, and famine. 

Achyuta was of opinion that this wonderful gem should be in the possession of 
Ugrasena; but although he had the power of taking it from Satrajit, he did not 
deprive him of it, that he might not occasion ally disagreement amongst the 
family. Satrajit, on the other hand, fearing that Krishna would ask him for the 
jewel, transferred it to his brother Prasena. Now it was the peculiar property of 
this jewel, that although it was an inexhaustible source of good to a virtuous 
person, yet when worn by a man of bad character it was the cause of his death. 
Prasena having taken the gem, and hung it round his neck, mounted his horse, 
and went to the woods to hunt. In the chase he was killed by a lion. The lion, 
taking the jewel in his mouth, was about to depart, when he was observed and 
killed by Jambavat, the king of the bears, who carrying off the gem retired into 
his cave, and gave it to his son Sukumara to play with. When some time had 
elapsed, and Prasena did not appear, the Yadavas began to whisper one to 
another, and to say, "This is Krishna's doing: desirous of the jewel, and not 
obtaining it, he has perpetrated the murder of Prasena in order to get it into his 
possession." 

When these calumnious rumours came to the knowledge of Krishna, he collected 
a number of the Yadavas, and accompanied by them pursued the course of 
Prasena by the impressions of his horse's hoofs. Ascertaining by this means that 
he and his horse had been killed by a lion, he was acquitted by all the people of 



any share in his death. Desirous of recovering the gem, he thence followed the 
steps of the lion, and at no great distance came to the place where the lion had 
been killed by the bear. Following the footmarks of the latter, he arrived at the 
foot of a mountain, where he desired the Yadavas to await him, whilst he 
continued the track. Still guided by the marks of the feet, he discovered a cavern, 
and had scarcely entered it when he heard the nurse of Sukumara saying to him, 
"The lion killed Prasena; the lion has been killed by Jambavat: weep not, 
Sukumara, the Syamantaka is your own." Thus assured of his object, Krishna 
advanced into the cavern, and saw the brilliant jewel in the hands of the nurse, 
who was giving it as a plaything to Sukumara. The nurse soon descried his 
approach, and marking his eyes fixed upon the gem with eager desire, called 
loudly for help. Hearing her cries, Jambavat, full of anger, came to the cave, and 
a conflict ensued between him and Achyuta, which lasted twenty-one days. The 
Yadavas who had accompanied the latter waited seven or eight days in 
expectation of his return, but as the foe of Madhu still came not forth, they 
concluded that he must have met his death in the cavern. "It could not have 
required so many days," they thought, "to overcome an enemy;" and accordingly 
they departed, and returned to Dwaraka, and announced that Krishna had been 
killed. 

When the relations of Achyuta heard this intelligence, they performed all the 
obsequial rites suited to the occasion. The food and water thus offered to Krishna 
in the celebration of his Sraddha served to support his life, and invigorate his 
strength in the combat in which he was engaged; whilst his adversary, wearied 
by daily conflict with a powerful foe, bruised and battered in every limb by 
heavy blows, and enfeebled by want of food, became unable longer to resist him. 
Overcome by his mighty antagonist, Jambavat cast himself before him and said, 
"Thou, mighty being, art surely invincible by all the demons, and by the spirits 
of heaven, earth, or hell; much less art thou to be vanquished by mean and 
powerless creatures in a human shape; and still less by such as we are, who are 
born of brute origin. Undoubtedly thou art a portion of my sovereign lord 
Narayaria, the defender of the universe." Thus addressed by Jambavat, Krishna 
explained to him fully that he had descended to take upon himself the burden of 
the earth, and kindly alleviated the bodily pain which the bear suffered from the 
fight, by touching him with his hand. Jambavat again prostrated himself before 
Krishna, and presented to him his daughter Jambavati, as an offering suitable to 
a guest. He also delivered to his visitor the Syamantaka jewel. Although a gift 



from such an individual was not fit for his acceptance, yet Krishna took the gem 
for the purpose of clearing his reputation. He then returned along with his bride 
Jambavati to Dwaraka.. 

When the people of Dwaraka beheld Krishna alive and returned, they were filled 
with delight, so that those who were bowed down with years recovered youthful 
vigour; and all the Yadavas, men and women, assembled round Anakadundubhi, 
the father of the hero, and congratulated him. Krishna related to the whole 
assembly of the Yadavas all that had happened, exactly as it had befallen, and 
restoring the Syamantaka jewel to Satrajit was exonerated from the crime of 
which he had been falsely accused. He then led Jambavati into the inner 
apartments. 

When Satrajit reflected that he had been the cause of the aspersions upon 
Krishna's character, he felt alarmed, and to conciliate the prince he gave him to 
wife his daughter Satyabhama. The maiden had been previously sought in 
marriage by several of the most distinguished Yadavas, as Akrura, Kritavarman 
and Satadhanwan, who were highly incensed at her being wedded to another, and 
leagued in enmity against Satrajit. The chief amongst them, with Akrura and 
Kritavarman, said to Satadhanwan, "This caitiff Satrajit has offered a gross insult 
to you, as well as to us who solicited his daughter, by giving her to Krishna: let 
him not live: why do you not kill him, and take the jewel? Should Achyuta 
therefore enter into feud with you, we will take your part." Upon this promise 
Satadhanwan undertook to slay Satrajit. 

When news arrived that the sons of Paridu had been burned in the house of wax, 
Krishna, who knew the real truth, set off for Baranavata to allay the animosity of 
Duryodhana, and to perform the duties his relationship required. Satadhanwan 
taking advantage of his absence, killed Satrajit in his sleep, and took possession 
of the gem. Upon this coming to the knowledge of Satyabhama, she immediately 
mounted her chariot, and, filled with fury at her father's murder, repaired to 
Baranavata, and told her husband how Satrajit had been killed by Satadhanwan 
in resentment of her having been married to another, and how he had carried off 
the jewel; and she implored him to take prompt measures to avenge such heinous 
wrong. Krishna, who is ever internally placid, being informed of these 
transactions, said to Satyabhama, as his eyes flashed with indignation, "These 
are indeed audacious injuries, but I will not submit to them from so vile a 



wretch. They must assail the tree, who would kill the birds that there have built 
their nests. Dismiss excessive sorrow; it needs not your lamentations to excite 
any wrath." Returning forthwith to Dwaraka, Krishna took Baladeva apart, and 
said to him, "A lion slew Prasena, hunting in the forests; and now Satrajit has 
been murdered by Satadhanwan. As both these are removed, the jewel which 
belonged to them is our common right. Up then, ascend your car, and put 
Satadhanwan to death." 

Being thus excited by his brother, Balarama engaged resolutely in the enterprise; 
but Satadhanwan, being aware of their hostile designs, repaired to Kritavarman, 
and required his assistance. Kritavarman, however, declined to assist him, 
pleading his inability to engage in a conflict with both Baladeva and Krishna. 
Satadhanwan thus disappointed, applied to Akrura; but he said, "You must have 
recourse to some other protector. How should I be able to defend you? There is 
no one even amongst the immortals, whose praises are celebrated throughout the 
universe, who is capable of contending with the wielder of the discus, at the 
stamp of whose foot the three worlds tremble; whose hand makes the wives of 
the Asuras widows, whose weapons no host, however mighty, can resist: no one 
is capable of encountering the wielder of the ploughshare, who annihilates the 
prowess of his enemies by the glances of his eyes, that roll with the joys of wine; 
and whose vast ploughshare manifests his might, by seizing and exterminating 
the most formidable foes." "Since this is the case," replied Satadhanwan, "and 
you are unable to assist me, at least accept and take care of this jewel." "I will do 
so," answered Akrura, "if you promise that even in the last extremity you will 
not divulge its being in my possession." To this Satadhanwan agreed, and Akrura 
took the jewel; and the former mounting a very swift mare, one that could travel 
a hundred leagues a day, fled from Dwaraka. 

When Krishna heard of Satadhanwan's flight, he harnessed his four horses, 
Saivya, Sugriva, Meghapushpa, and Balahaka, to his car, and, accompanied by 
Balarama, set off in pursuit. The mare held her speed, and accomplished her 
hundred leagues; but when she reached the country of Mithila, her strength was 
exhausted, and she dropped down and died. Satadhanwan dismounting, 
continued his flight on foot. When his pursuers came to the place where the mare 
had perished, Krishna said to Balarama, "Do you remain in the car, whilst I 
follow the villain on foot, and put him to death; the ground here is bad; and the 
horses will not be able to drag the chariot across it." Balarama accordingly 



stayed with the car, and Krishna followed Satadhanwan on foot: when he had 
chased him for two kos, he discharged his discus, and, although Satadhanwan 
was at a considerable distance, the weapon struck off his head. Krishna then 
coining up, searched his body and his dress for the Syamantaka jewel, but found 
it not. He then returned to Balabhadra, and told him that they had effected the 
death of Satadhanwan to no purpose, for the precious gem, the quintessence of 
all worlds, was not upon his person. When Balabhadra heard this, he flew into a 
violent rage, and said to Vasudeva, "Shame light upon you, to be thus greedy of 
wealth! I acknowledge no brotherhood with you. Here lies my path. Go whither 
you please; I have done with Dwaraka, with you, with all our house. It is of no 
use to seek to impose upon me with thy perjuries." Thus reviling his brother, 
who fruitlessly endeavoured to appease him, Balabhadra went to the city of 
Videha, where Janaka received him hospitably, and there he remained. Vasudeva 
returned to Dwaraka. It was during his stay in the dwelling of Janaka that 

r 

Duryodhana, the son of Dhritarashtra, learned from Balabhadra the art of 
fighting with the mace. At the expiration of three years, Ugrasena and other 
chiefs of the Yadavas, being satisfied that Krishna had not the jewel, went to 
Videha, and removed Balabhadra's suspicions, and brought him home. 

Akrura, carefully considering the treasures which the precious jewel secured to 
him, constantly celebrated religious rites, and, purified with holy prayers, lived 
in affluence for fifty-two years; and through the virtue of that gem there was no 
dearth nor pestilence in the whole country. At the end of that period, Satrughna, 
the great grandson of Satwata, was killed by the Bhojas, and as they were in 
bonds of alliance with Akrura, he accompanied them in their flight from 
Dwaraka. From the moment of his departure various calamities, portents, snakes, 
dearth, plague, and the like, began to prevail; so that he whose emblem is 
Garuda called together the Yadavas, with Balabhadra and Ugrasena, and 
recommended them to consider how it was that so many prodigies should have 
occurred at the same time. On this Andhaka, one of the elders of the Yadhu race, 
thus spake: "Wherever Swaphalka, the father of Akrura, dwelt, there famine, 
plague, dearth, and other visitations were unknown. Once when there was want 
of rain in the kingdom of Kasiraja, Swaphalka was brought there, and 
immediately there fell rain from the heavens. It happened also that the queen of 
Kasiraja conceived, and was quick with a daughter; but when the time of 
delivery arrived, the child issued not from the womb. Twelve years passed away, 
and still the girl was unborn. Then Kasiraja spake to the child, and said, 



'Daughter, why is your birth thus delayed? come forth; I desire to behold you, 
why do you inflict this protracted suffering upon your mother?' Thus addressed, 
the infant answered, 'If, father, you will present a cow every day to the 
Brahmans, I shall at the end of three years more be born.' The king accordingly 
presented daily a cow to the Brahmans, and at the end of three years the damsel 
came into the world. Her father called her Gandini, and he subsequently gave her 
to Swaphalka, when he came to his palace for his benefit. Gandini, as long as she 
lived, gave a cow to the Brahmans every day. Akrura was her son by Swaphalka, 
and his birth therefore proceeds from a combination of uncommon excellence. 
When a person such as he is, is absent from us, is it likely that famine, 
pestilence, and prodigies should fail to occur? Let him then he invited to return: 
the faults of men of exalted worth must not be too severely scrutinized." 

Agreeably to the advice of Audhaka the elder, the Yadavas sent a mission, 
headed by Kesava, Ugrasena, and Balabhadra, to assure Akrura that no notice 
would be taken of any irregularity committed by him; and having satisfied him 
that he was in no danger, they brought him back to Dwaraka. Immediately on his 
arrival, in consequence of the properties of the jewel, the plague, dearth, famine, 
and every other calamity and portent, ceased. Krishna, observing this, reflected 
that the descent of Akrura from Gandini and Swaphalka was a cause wholly 
disproportionate to such an effect, and that some more powerful influence must 
be exerted to arrest pestilence and famine. "Of a surety," said he to himself, "the 
great Syamantaka jewel is in his keeping, for such I have heard are amongst its 
properties. This Akrura too has been lately celebrating sacrifice after sacrifice; 
his own means are insufficient for such expenses; it is beyond a doubt that he has 
the jewel." Having come to this conclusion, he called a meeting of all the 
Yadavas at his house, under the pretext of some festive celebration. When they 
were all seated, and the. purport of their assembling had been explained, and the 
business accomplished, Krishna entered into conversation with Akrura, and, 
after laughing and joking, said to him, "Kinsman, you are a very prince in your 
liberality; but we know very well that the precious jewel which was stolen by 
Sudhanwan was delivered by him to you, and is now in your possession, to the 
great benefit of this kingdom. So let it remain; we all derive advantage from its 
virtues. But Balabhadra suspects that I have it, and therefore, out of kindness to 
me, shew it to the assembly." When Akrura, who had the jewel with him, was 
thus taxed, he hesitated what he should do. "If I deny that I have the jewel," 
thought he, "they will search my person, and find the gem hidden amongst my 



clothes. I cannot submit to a search." So reflecting, Akrura said to Narayana, the 
cause of the whole world, "It is true that the Syamantaka jewel was entrusted to 
me by Satadhanwan, when he went from hence. I expected every day that you 
would ask me for it, and with much inconvenience therefore I have kept it until 
now. The charge of it has subjected me to so much anxiety, that I have been 
incapable of enjoying any pleasure, and have never known a moment's ease. 
Afraid that you would think me unfit to retain possession of a jewel so essential 
to the welfare of the kingdom, I forbore to mention to you its being in my hands; 
but now take it yourself, and give the care of it to whom you please." Having 
thus spoken, Akrura drew forth from his garments a small gold box, and took 
from it the jewel. On displaying it to the assembly of the Yadavas, the whole 
chamber where they sat was illuminated by its radiance. "This," said Akrura, "is 
the Syamantaka gem, which was consigned to me by Satadhanwan: let him to 
whom it belongs now take it." 

When the Yadavas beheld the jewel, they were filled with astonishment, and 
loudly expressed their delight. Balabhadra immediately claimed the jewel as his 
property jointly with Achyuta, as formerly agreed upon; whilst Satyabhama, 
demanded it as her right, as it had originally belonged to her father. Between 
these two Krishna considered himself as an ox between the two wheels of a cart, 
and thus spake to Akrura in the presence of all the Yadavas: "This jewel has 
been exhibited to the assembly in order to clear my reputation; it is the joint right 
of Balabhadra and myself, and is the patrimonial inheritance of Satyabhama. But 
this jewel, to be of advantage to the whole kingdom, should be taken charge of 
by a person who leads a life of perpetual continence: if worn by an impure 
individual, it will be the cause of his death. Now as I have sixteen thousand 
wives, I am not qualified to have the care of it. It is not likely that Satyabhama 
will agree to the conditions that would entitle her to the possession of the jewel; 
and as to Balabhadra, he is too much addicted to wine and the pleasures of sense 
to lead a life of self-denial. We are therefore out of the question, and all the 
Yadavas, Balabhadra, Satyabhama, and myself, request you, most bountiful 
Akrura, to retain the care of the jewel, as you have done hitherto, for the general 
good; for you are qualified to have the keeping of it, and in your hands it has 
been productive of benefit to the country. You must not decline compliance with 
our request." Akrura, thus urged, accepted the jewel, and thenceforth wore it 
publicly round his neck, where it shone with dazzling brightness; and Akrura 
moved about like the sun, wearing a garland of light. 



He who calls to mind the vindication of the character of Krishna from false 
aspersions, shall never become the subject of unfounded accusation in the least 
degree, and living in the full exercise of his senses shall be cleansed from every 
sin. 




Footnotes 

01. The Agni acknowledges but four sons, but all the rest agree in the 
number, and mostly in the names, Mahabhoja is sometimes read 
Mahabhaga. 

02. Krimi: Brahma, Agni, Kurma. 

03. Panava: Vayu. Kramaria: Brahma. Kriparia: Padma. Kinkiria: Bhagavata. 
04. Dhrishthi: Bhagavata, Brahma. 

05. The Brahma and Hari V. add to the first three Sara and Puranjaya, and to 
the second Dasaka. 

06. By the Parriasa river: Brahma P.: a river in Malwa. 

07. These are made incorrectly the descendants of Babhru in the Hari V. 

08. The Bhagavata, Matsya, and Vayu agree in the main, as to the genealogy 
that follows, with our text. The Vayu states that Vrishni had two wives, 
Madri and Gandhari; by the former he had Yudhajit and Anamitra, and by 
the latter Sumitra and Devamidhush. The Matsya also names the ladies, 
but gives Sumitra to Gandhari, and makes Madri the mother of Yudhajit, 

r r 

Devamidhusha, Anamitra, and Sini. The Agni has a similar arrangement, 

r 

but substitutes Dhrishta for Vrishni, and makes him the fifteenth in 
descent from Satwata. The Linga, Padma, Brahma P., and Hari V. have 
made great confusion by altering, apparently without any warrant, the 

r 

name of Vrishni to Kroshtri. 

09. The Bhagavata makes them sons of Yudhajit; the Matsya and Agni, as 
observed in the preceding note, his brothers as well as Sumitra's. 

10. This alludes to events detailed in the Mahabharata. 

11. The Vayu calls Sudhanwan or Satadhanwan king of Mithila. 

12. A rather violent anachronism to make Janaka cotemporary with 
Balarama. 


13. The text gives the commencement of the prayer, but the commentator 
does not say whence it is taken: 'Oh, goddess! the murderer of a 
Kshatriya or Vaisya, engaged in religious duties, is the slayer of a 
Brahman;' i. e. the crime is equally heinous. Perhaps the last word should 
be ### 'is.' 

14. Some of the circumstances of this marvellous gem seem to identify it 
with a stone of widely diffused celebrity in the East, and which, 
according to the Mohammedan writers, was given originally by Noah to 
Japhet; the Hijer al mattyr of the Arabs, Sang yeddat of the Persians, and 
Jeddah tash of the Turks, the possession of which secures rain and 
fertility. The author of the Habib us Seir gravely asserts that this stone 
was in the hands of the Mongols in his day, or in the tenth century. 

15. Krishna's reflecting, the commentator observes, is to be understood of 
him only as consistent with the account here given of him, as if he were a 
mere man; for, as he was omniscient, there was no occasion for him to 
reflect or reason. Krishna however appears in this story in a very 
different light from that in which he is usually represented; and the 
adventure, it may be remarked, is detached from the place in which we 
might have expected to find it, the narrative of his life, which forms the 
subject of the next book. 

16. The story of the Syamantaka gem occurs in the Bhagavata, Vayu, 
Matsya, Brahma, and Hari V., and is alluded to in other Purarias. It may 
be considered as one common to the whole series. Independently of the 
part borne in it by Krishna, it presents a curious and no doubt a faithful 
picture of ancient manners, in the loose self-government of a kindred 
clan, in the acts of personal violence which are committed, in the feuds 
which ensue, in the public meetings which are held, and the part that is 
taken by the elders and by the women in all the proceedings of the 
community. 





14. Chapter 


Descendants of Sini, of Anamitra, of Swaphalka and Chitraka, of Andhaka. The 
children of Devaka and Ugrasena. The descendants of Bhajamana. Children of 

r r 

Sura: his son Vasudeva: his daughter Pritha married to Pandu: her children 
Yudhishthira and his brothers; also Kama by Aditya. The sons of Pandu by 
Madri. Husbands and children of Sura's other daughters. Previous births of 
Sisupala. 

THE younger brother of Anamitra was Sini; his son was Satyaka; his son was 
Yuyudhana, also known by the name of Satyaki; his son was Asanga; his son 
was Tuni his son was Yugandhara. These princes were termed Saineyas. 

In the family of Anamitra, Prisni was born; his son was Swaphalka, the sanctity 
of whose character has been described: the younger brother of Swaphalka was 
named Chitraka. Swaphalka had by Gandini, besides Akrura, Upamadgu, 
Mridura, Sarimejaya, Giri, Kshatropakshatra, Satrughna, Arimarddana, 

r 

Dharmadhris, Dhrishtasarman, Gandhamojavaha, and Prativaha. He had also a 
daughter, Sutara. 

Devavat and Upadeva were the sons of Akrura. The sons of Chitrika were Prithu 
and Vipritha, and many others. Andhaka had four sons, Kukkura, Bhajamana, 
Suchi, Kambalavarhish. The son of Kukkura was Vrishta his son was 
Kapotaroman; his son was Viloman his son was Bhava, who was also called 
Chandanodakadundubhi he was a friend of the Gandharba Tumburu; his son was 
Abhijit; his son was Punarvasu; his son was Ahuka, and he had also a daughter 
named Ahuki. The sons of Ahuka were Devaka and Ugrasena. The former had 
four sons, Devavat, Upadeva, Sudeva, and Devarakshita, and seven daughters, 
Vrikadeva, Upadeva, Devarakshita, Srideva, Santideva, Sahadeva, and Devaki: 
all the daughters were married to Vasudeva. The sons of Ugrasena were Kansa, 

r r r 

Nyagrodha, Sunaman, Kanka, Sanku, Subhumi, Rashtrapala, Yuddhamushthi, 

r r 

and Tushtimat; and his daughters were Kansa, Kansavati, Sutanu, Rashtrapali, 
and Kanki. 

The son of Bhajamana was Viduratha; his son was Sura; his son was Samin his 


son was Pratikshatra his son was Swayambhoja his son was Hridika, who had 

r r r 

Kritavarman, Satadhanu, Devamidhusha, and others. Sura, the son of 
Devamidhusha, was married to Marisha, and had by her ten sons. On the birth of 
Vasudeva, who was one of these sons, the gods, to whom the future is manifest, 
foresaw that the divine being would take a human form in his family, and 
thereupon they sounded with joy the drums of heaven: from this circumstance 
Vasudeva was also called Anakadunbubhi. His brothers were Devabhaga, 

r r r r 

Devasravas, Anadhrishti, Karundhaka, Vatsabalaka, Srinjaya, Syama, Samika, 

r r r r 

and Gandusha; and his sisters were Pritha, Srutadeva, Srutakirtti, Srutasravas, 
and Rajadhidevi. 

Sura had a friend named Kuntibhoja, to whom, as he had no children, the 
presented in due form his daughter Pritha. She was married to Pandu, and bore 
him Yudhishthira, Bhima, and Arjuna, who were in fact the sons of the deities 
Dharma, Vayu (air), and Indra. Whilst she was yet unmarried, also, she had a son 
named Kama, begotten by the divine Aditya (the sun). Pandu had another wife, 
named Madri, who had by the twin sons of Aditya, Nasatya and Dasra, two sons, 
Nakula and Sahadeva. 

Srutadeva was married to the Karusha prince Vriddhasarman, and bore him the 
fierce Asura Dantavaktra. Dhrishtaketu, raja of Kaikeya, married Srutakirtti, and 
had by her Santarddana and four other sons, known as the five Kaikeyas. 
Jayasena, king of Avanti, married Rajadhidevi, and had Vinda and Anavinda. 
Srutasravas was wedded to Damaghosha, raja of Chedi, and bore him Sisupala. 
This prince was in a former existence the unrighteous but valiant monarch of the 
Daityas, Hiranyakasipu, who was killed by the divine guardian of creation (in 
the man-lion Avatara). He was next the ten-headed sovereign Ravana, whose 
unequalled prowess, strength, and power were overcome by the lord of the three 
worlds, Rama. Having been killed by the deity in the form of Raghava, he had 
long enjoyed the reward of his virtues in exemption from an embodied state, but 
had now received birth once more as Sisupala, the son of Damaghosha, king of 
Chedi. In this character he renewed, with greater inveteracy than ever, his hostile 
hatred towards the god surnamed Puridarikaksha, a portion of the supreme being, 
who had descended to lighten the burdens of the earth; and was in consequence 
slain by him: but from the circumstance of his thoughts being constantly 
engrossed by the supreme being, Sisupala was united with him after death; for 
the lord giveth to those to whom he is favourable whatever they desire, and he 



bestows a heavenly and exalted station even upon those whom he slays in his 
displeasure. 




Footnotes 

01. Bhuti: Vayu. Kuni: Bhagavata. Dyumni: Matsya. 

02. The Agni makes these all brother's sons of Satyaka, and adds another, 
Rishabha, the father of Swaphalka. 

03. The authorities are not agreed here. Swaphalka, according to the Agni, as 
just remarked, comes from Sini, the son of Anamitra. The Bhagavata, 
instead of Prisni, has Vrishni, son of Anamitra; the Brahma and Hari V. 
have Vrishni; and the Agni, Prishrii, son of Yudhajit. The Matsya also 
makes Yudhajit the ancestor of Akrura, through Rishabha and Jayanta. 

r 

Yudhajit in the Brahma, &c. is the son of Kroshtri. 

04. The different authorities vary in the reading of these names, though they 
generally concur in the number. 

05. The Matsya and Padma call them sons of Akrura, but no doubt 
incorrectly. 

06. Sami: Vayu. Sasi: Matsya. Sini Agni. This last makes them the sons of 
Babhru, and calls the first Sundara. 

r 

07. Vrishni: Bhagavata, Vayu, Matsya, &c. Dhrishta: Agni. Dhrishriu: 
Brahma, Hari V. 

08. The Bhagavata puts Viloman first. The Linga makes it an epithet of 
Kapotaroman, saying he was Vilomaja, 'irregularly begotten.' In place of 
Viloman we have Raivata, Vayu; Taittiri, Matsya; Tittiri, Agni. 

09. Nava: Agni. Bala: Linga. Nala: Matsya. Tomas: Kurma. Anu: Bhagavata. 

10. The Matsya, Vayu, and Agni agree with our text. The Linga, Padma, and 
Kurma read Anakadundubhi as a synonyme of Bala. The Brahma and 
Hari V. have no such name, but here insert Punarvasu, son of Taittiri. The 
Bhagavata has a different series, or Anu, Andhaka, Dundubhi, Arijit, 
Punarvasu, Ahuka. 

11. This Bhajamana is the son of Andhaka, according to all the best 
authorities; so the Padma calls this branch the Andhakas. The Agni 
makes him the son of Babhru. 


12. Vata, Nivata, Samin: Vayu. 

13. Sonaswa: Matsya. Sonaksha: Padma. Sini: Bhajavata. 

14. Bhojaka: Agni. Bhoja: Padma. 

15. Ten sons: Matsya, &c. 

16. Devarha: Vayu, Padma, Agni, and Matsya; and a different series follows, 
or Kambalavarhish, Asamaujas, Samaujas, Sudanstra, Suvasa, Dhrishta, 
Anamitra, Nighna, Satrajit. They all make Vasudeva the son of Sura, 
however; but the three first leave it doubtful whether that Sura was the 
son of Bhajamana or not. The Bhagavata and Brahma agree with the text, 
which is probably correct. The Brahma has Sura son of Devamidhush, 
although it does not specify the latter amongst the sons of Hridika. 

17. Anaka a larger, and Dundubhi a smaller drum. 

18. The Mahabharata is the best authority for these circumstances. 

19. The Padma calls him king of Kashmir. 

20. The Brahma P. and Hari V. make Srutadeva mother of Sisupala, and 
Prithukirtti of Dantavaktra. 




15. Chapter 


Explanation of the reason why Sisupala in his previous births as Hiranyakasipu 
and Ravana was not identified with Vishnu on being slain by him, and was so 
identified when killed as Sisupala. The wives of Vasudeva: his children: 
Balarama and Krishna his sons by Devaki: born apparently of Rohini and 
Yasoda. The wives and children of Krishna. Multitude of the descendants of 
Yadu. 

MAITREYA.—Most eminent of all who cultivate piety, I am curious to hear from 
you, and you are able to explain to me, how it happened that the same being who 
when killed by Vishnu as Hiranyakasipu and Ravana obtained enjoyments 
which, though scarcely attainable by the immortals, were but temporary, should 
have been absorbed into the eternal Hari when slain by him in the person of 
Sisupala. 

PARASARA.—When the divine author of the creation, preservation, and 
destruction of the universe accomplished the death of Hiranyakasipu, he 
assumed a body composed of the figures of a lion and a man, so that 
Hiranyakasipu was not aware that his destroyer was Vishnu: although therefore 
the quality of purity, derived from exceeding merit, had been attained, yet his 
mind was perplexed by the predominance of the property of passion; and the 
consequence of that intermixture was, that he reaped, as the result of his death by 
the hands of Vishnu, only unlimited power and enjoyment upon earth, as 
Dasanana, the sovereign of the three spheres; he did not obtain absorption into 
the supreme spirit, that is without beginning or end, because his mind was not 
wholly dedicated to that sole object. So also Dasanana being entirely subject to 
the passion of love, and engrossed completely by the thoughts of Janaki, could 
not comprehend that the son of Dasaratha whom he beheld was in reality the 
divine Achyuta. At the moment of his death he was impressed with the notion 
that his adversary was a mortal, and therefore the fruit he derived from being 
slain by Vishnu was confined to his birth in the illustrious family of the kings of 
Chedi, and the exercise of extensive dominion. In this situation many 
circumstances brought the names of Vishnu to his notice, and on all these 
occasions the enmity that had accumulated through successive births influenced 


his mind; and in speaking constantly with disrespect of Achyuta, he was ever 
repeating his different appellations. Whether walking, eating, sitting, or sleeping, 
his animosity was never at rest, and Krishna was ever present to his thoughts in 
his ordinary semblance, having eyes as beautiful as the leaf of the lotus, clad in 
bright yellow raiment, decorated with a garland, with bracelets on his arms and 
wrists, and a diadem on his head; having four robust arms, bearing the conch, the 
discus, the mace, and the lotus. Thus uttering his names, even though in 
malediction, and dwelling upon his image, though in enmity, he beheld Krishna, 
when inflicting his death, radiant with resplendent weapons, bright with 
ineffable splendour in his own essence as the supreme being, and all his passion 
and hatred ceased, and he was purified front every defect. Being killed by the 
discus of Vishnu at the instant he thus meditated, all his sins were consumed by 
his divine adversary, and he was blended with him by whose might he had been 
slain. I have thus replied to your inquiries. He by whom the divine Vishnu is 
named or called to recollection, even in enmity, obtains a reward that is difficult 
of attainment to the demons and the gods: how much greater shall be his 
recompense who glorifies the deity in fervour and in faith! 

Vasudeva, also called Anakadandubhi, had Rohifh, Pauravi, Bhadra, Madira, 
Devaki, and several other wives. His sons by Rohifh were Balabhadra, Sarana, 

r r 

Saru, Durmada, and others. Balabhadra espoused Revati, and had by her Nisatha 
and Ulmuka. The sons of Sarana were Marshti, Marshtimat, Sisu, Satyadhriti, 
and others. Bhadraswa, Bhadrabahu, Durgama, Bhuta, and others, were born in 
the family of Rohifh (of the race of Puru). The sons of Vasudeva by Madira were 
Nanda, Upananda, Kritaka, and others. Bhadra bore him Upanidhi, Gada, and 
others. By his wife Vaisali he had one son named Kausika. Devaki bore him six 
sons, Kirttimat, Susheria, Udayin, Bhadrasena, Rijudasa, and Bhadradeha; all of 
whom Kansa put to death. 

When Devaki was pregnant the seventh time, Yoganidra (the sleep of devotion), 
sent by Vishnu, extricated the embryo from its maternal womb at midnight, and 
transferred it to that of Rohifh; and from having been thus taken away, the child 
(who was Balarama) received the name of Sankarsharia. Next, the divine Vishnu 
himself, the root of the vast universal tree, inscrutable by the understandings of 
all gods, demons, sages, and men, past, present, or to come, adored by Brahma 
and all the deities, he who is without beginning, middle, or end, being moved to 
relieve the earth of her load, descended into the womb of Devaki, and was born 



as her son Vasudeva. Yoganidra, proud to execute his orders, removed the 
embryo to Yasoda, the wife of Nanda the cowherd. At his birth the earth was 
relieved from all iniquity; the sun, moon, and planets shone with unclouded 
splendour; all fear of calamitous portents was dispelled; and universal happiness 
prevailed. From the moment he appeared, all mankind were led into the 
righteous path in him. 

Whilst this powerful being resided in this world of mortals, he had sixteen 
thousand and one hundred wives; of these the principal were Rukmini, 
Satyabhama, Jambavati, Jatahasini, and four others. By these the universal form, 
who is without beginning, begot a hundred and eighty thousand sons, of whom 
thirteen are most renowned, Pradyumna, Charudeshria, Samba, and others. 
Pradyumna married Kakudwati, the daughter of Rukmin, and had by her 
Aniruddha. Aniruddha married Subhadra, the granddaughter of the same 
Rukmin, and she bore him a son named Vajra. The son of Vajra was Bahu; and 
his son was Sucharu. 

In this manner the descendants of Yadu multiplied, and there were many 
hundreds of thousands of them, so that it would be impossible to repeat their 
names in hundreds of years. Two verses relating to them are current: "The 
domestic instructors of the boys in the use of arms amounted to three crores and 
eighty lacs (or thirty-eight millions). Who shall enumerate the whole of the 
mighty men of the Yadava race, who were tens of ten thousands and hundreds of 
hundred thousands in number?" Those powerful Daityas who were killed in the 
conflicts between them and the gods were born again upon earth as men, as 
tyrants and oppressors; and, in order to check their violence, the gods also 
descended to the world of mortals, and became members of the hundred and one 
branches of the family of Yadu. Vishnu was to them a teacher and a ruler, and all 
the Yadavas were obedient to his commands. 

Whoever listens frequently to this account of the origin of the heroes of the race 
of Vrishrii, shall be purified from all sin, and obtain the sphere of Vishnu. 


Footnotes 


01. Pauravi is rather a title attached to a second Rohini, to distinguish her 
from the first, the mother of Balarama: she is also said by the Vayu to be 
the daughter of Bahlika. 

02. The enumeration of our text is rather imperfect. The Vayu names the 
wives of Vasudeva, Pauravi, Rohini, Madira, Rudra, Vaisakhi, Devaki; 
and adds two bondmaids, Sugandhi and Vanaraji. The Brahma P. and 
Hari V. name twelve wives, and two slaves; Rohini, Madira, Vaisakhi, 
Bhadra, Sunamni, Sahadeva, Santideva, Srideva, Devarakshita, 
Vrikadevi, Upadevi, Devaki; and Santanu and Barava. The children of 
the two slaves, according to the Vayu, were Puridra, who became a king, 
and Kapila, who retired to the woods. In the Bhagavata we have thirteen 
wives, Pauravi, Rohini, Bhadra, Madira, Rochana, Ila, Devaki, 
Dhritadevi, Santideva, Upadevi, Srideva, Devarakshita, and Sahadeva: 
the last seven in this and the preceding list are the daughters of Devaka. 

03. The wives and children of Krishna are more particularly described in the 
next book. The Brahma P. and Hari V. add some details of the 
descendants of Vasudeva's brothers: thus Devabhaga is said to be the 

r r 

father of Uddhava; Anadhrishti of Devasravas, a great scholar or Pandit. 
Devasravas, another brother of Vasudeva, had Satrughna and another son 
called Ekalavya, who for some cause being exposed when an infant, was 
found and brought up by the Nishadas, and was thence termed Nishadin. 

r 

Vatsavat (Vatsabalaka) and Garidusha being childless, Vasudeva gave his 
son Kausika to be adopted by the former, and Krishna gave Charudeshria 
and three others to the latter. Kanaka (Karundhaka) had two sons, 
Tantrija and Tantripala. Avaksrinjima (Srinjaya) had also two, Vira and 
Aswahanu. The gracious Samika became as the son (although the 
brother) of Syama, and disdaining the joint rule which the princes of the 

r 

house of Bhoja exercised, made himself paramount. Yudhishthira was his 
friend. The extravagant numbers of the Yadavas merely indicate that they 
were, as they undoubtedly were, a powerful and numerous tribe, of 
whom many traces exist in various parts of India. 




16. Chapter 


Descendants of Turvasu. 

PARASARA.—I shall now summarily give you an account of the descendants of 
Turvasu. 

The son of Turvasu was Vahni his son was Gobanu his son was Traisamba his 
son was Karandhama; his son was Marutta. Marutta had no children, and he 
therefore adopted Dushyanta, of the family of Puru; by which the line of Turvasu 
merged into that of Puru. This took place in consequence of the malediction 
denounced on his son by Yayati. 


Footnotes 


01. Varga: Agni. 

02. Bhanumat: Bhagavata, which also inserts Bhaga before him. 

03. Tribhanu: Vayu. Trisanu: Brahma. Traisali: Agni. Trisari: Matsya. 

04. Besides Bharata, who, as will be hereafter seen, was the son of 
Dushyanta, the Vayu, Matsya, Agni, and Brahma Purarias enumerate 
several descendants in this line, for the purpose evidently of introducing, 
as the posterity of Turvasu, the nations of the south of India: the series is 
Varuttha, (Karutthama, Brahma), Andira (Akrira, Brahma); whose sons 

r r 

are Paridya, Karriata, Chola, Kerala; the Hari V. adds Kola, and the Agni 
very incorrectly Gandhara. 

05. The curse alluded to is the failure of his line (Prajasamuchcheda), 
denounced upon Turvasu as the punishment of refusing to take his 
father's infirmities upon him (see p. 414). He was also sentenced to rule 
over savages and barbarians, Mlechchhas, or people not Hindus. The 
Mahabharata adds that the Yavanas sprang from Turvasu. As sovereign 
of the southeast, he should be the ancestor of the people of Arracan, Ava, 
&c.; but the authorities cited in the preceding note refer the nations of the 


Peninsula to him, and consequently consider them as Mlechchhas. Manu 
also places the Draviras or Tamuls amongst Mlechchhas; and these and 
similar passages indicate a period prior to the introduction of Hinduism 
into the south of India. 




17. Chapter 


Descendants of Druhyu. 

THE son of Druhyu was Babhru; his son was Setu; his son was Aradwat his son 
was Gandhara his son was Dharma his son was Dhrita his son was Duryaman his 
son was Prachetas, who had a hundred sons, and they were the princes of the 
lawless Mlechchhas or barbarians of the north. 


Footnotes 

r r r r 

01. Also Araddha in MSS., and Aratta, Matsya, which last seems to be the 
preferable reading. The Vayu has Aruddha; the Brahma, Angarasetu; but 

r r r 

Aratta is a northern country, contiguous to, or synonymous with, 
Gandhara. 

02. Of Gandhara it is said in the Vayu that it is a large country named after 
him, and is famous for its breed of horses: ###. The Matsya reads the 

r r r 

beginning of the second line ###, shewing that Aratta and Gandhara are 
much the same. 

03. The Brahma P. and Hari V., in opposition to all the rest, make Dharma 
and his successors the descendants of Anu. 

04. Ghrita: Agni. 

05. Durdama: Vayu and Bhagavata. The Matsya, Brahma, and Agni insert a 
Vidupa, Duduha, or Vidula, before Prachetas. 

06. So the Bhagavata and Matsya. The Mahabharata says the descendants of 
Druhya are the Vaibhojas, a people unacquainted with the use of cars or 
beasts of burden, and who travel on rafts: they have no kings. 






18. Chapter 


Descendants of Anu. Countries and towns named after some of them, as Anga, 

Banga, and others. 

ANU, the fourth son of Yayati, had three sons, Sabhanara, Chakshusha, and 
Paramekshu. The son of the first was Kalanara his son was Srinjaya; his son was 
Puranjaya; his son was Janamejaya; his son was Mahamani his son was 
Mahamanas, who had two sons, Usinara and Titikshu. Usinara had five sons, 
Sivi, Triha, Gara, Krimi, Darvan. Sivi had four sons, Vrishadarbha, Suvira, 
Kaikeya, and Madra. Titikshu had one son, Ushadratha his son was Hema his 
son was Sutapas; his son was Bali, on whose wife five sons were begotten by 
Dirghatamas, or Anga, Banga, Kalinga, Suhma, and Puridra and their 
descendants, and the five countries they inhabited, were known by the same 
names. 

The son of Anga was Para his son was Divaratha; his son was Dharmaratha his 
son was Chitraratha; his son was Romapada, also called Dasaratha, to whom, 
being childless, Dasaratha, the son of Aja, gave his daughter Santa to be 
adopted. After this, Romapada had a son named Chaturanga; his son was 
Prithulaksha; his son was Champa, who founded the city of Champa. The son of 
Champa was Haryyanga; his son was Bhadraratha, who had two sons, 
Vrihatkarman and Vrihadratha. The son of the first was Vrihadbhanu his son was 
Vrihanmanas; his son was Jayadratha, who, by a wife who was the daughter of a 
Kshatriya father and Brahmani mother, had a son named Vijaya his son was 
Dhriti; his son was Dhritavrata; his son was Satyakarman; his son was 
Adhiratha, who found Kama in a basket on the banks of the Ganges, where he 
had been exposed by his mother, Pritha. The son of Kama was Vrishasena. These 
were the Anga kings. You shall next hear who were the descendants of Pum. 


Footnotes 


01. By some unaccountable caprice the Brahma P. and Hari V., unsupported 
by any other authority, here substitute for Anu the name of Kaksheyu, a 
descendant of Puru, and transfer the whole series of his posterity to the 
house of Puru. 

02. Paksha and Parapaksha: Vayu. Parameshu: Matsya. Paroksha: 

Bhagavata. 

03. Kalanala: Vayu. Kolahala: Matsya. 

04. Mahasala: Agni. Mahasila: Bhagav. 

05. Nriga: Agni. Vana: Bhagavata. 

06. Nava: Matsya. Sama: Bhagavata. 

07. Vrata: Agni. Suvrata: Matsya. Daksha: Bhagavata. According to the 
Brahma P. and Hari V. the five sons of Usinara were the ancestors of 
different tribes. Sivi was the progenitor of the Saivas; Nriga of the 

r r r 

Yaudheyas; Nava of the Navarashtras; Vrata of the Ambashthas; and 
Krimi founded the city Krimila. 

08. Bhadra and Bhadraka: Matsya, Agni. These sons of Sivi give name to 
different provinces and tribes in the west and north-west of India. 

09. Rushadratha: Agni. Tushadratha: Matsya. 

10. Pheria: Agni. Sena: Matsya. 

11. Odra, or in some copies Andhra: Bhagavata. 

12. Of Suhma it may be remarked, that it is specified in the Siddhanta 

Kaumudi as an example of Panini's rule; 17.3.24; by which Nagara 

compounded with names of countries in the east becomes Nagara, as 
Sauhmanagara, 'produced, &c. in a city of Suhma.' The descendants of 
Anu, according to the Mahabharata were all Mlechchhas. The last named 
work, as well as the Vayu and Matsya Purarias, have an absurd story of 
the circumstances of the birth of Dirghatamas, who was the son of Ujasi 
or Utathya, the elder brother of Vrihaspati by Mamata, and of his 
begetting Anga and the rest. They agree in assigning descendants of all 
four castes to them; the Vayu stating that Bali had ### and the Matsya 
ascribing it to a boon given by Brahma to Bali: 'Do thou establish the 
four perpetual castes.' Of these, the Brahmans are known as Baleyas: 
###. The Matsya calls Bali, the son of Virochana, and 'existing for a 
whole Kalpa;' identifying him therefore, only in a different period and 
form, with the Bali of the Vamana Avatara. 

13. Anapana: Vayu. Khanapana: Bhagavata. Adhivahana: Agni. 
Dadhivahana: Matsya. 



14. This prince is said in the Vayu to have drank the Soma juice along with 
Indra. 

15. The Matsya and Agni insert a Satyaratha. 

16. This is noticed in the Ramayana, in the story of the hermit Rishyasringa, 
to whom Santa was given in marriage. Her adoptive father is called in the 
Ramayana, as the is in the Agni and Matsya, Lomapada: the meaning is 
the same, 'hairy foot.' Ramayana, IX. X. See also Prelude to the Uttara 
Rama Cheritra, Hindu Theatre, I. 289. 

17. The Bhagavata differs here from all the other authorities in omitting 
Champa, the founder of Champapuri, a city of which traces still remain 
in the vicinity of Bhagalpur, having inserted him previously amongst the 
descendants of Ikshwaku. Champa is every where recognised as the 
capital of Anga, and the translators of the Ramayana were very wide of 
the truth, when they conjectured that it might be Angwa or Ava. 

18. Vrihaddarbha: Brahma. The Bhagavata omits the two successors of 
Champa, and makes Vrihadratha, Vrihatkarman, and Vrihadbhanu, sons 
of Prithulaksha. 

19. The Vayu, Matsya, and Hari V. make Vijaya the brother of Jayadratha. 
The Bhagavata agrees with our text. The mother of Vijaya from her 
origin was of the Suta caste, the genealogist and charioteer. Manu, X. 47. 
Her son was of the same caste, children taking the caste of the mother: 
consequently the descendants of Vijaya, kings of Anga, were Sutas; and 
this explains the contemptuous application of the term Suta to Kama, the 
half brother of the Paridus; for he, as will presently be mentioned, was 
adopted into the Anga family, and succeeded to the crown. 

20. Some variety prevails in the series of princes here, but this arises from 
not distinguishing the collateral lines, the descendants of Jayadratha from 
those of Vijaya. The Vayu and Matsya give the latter as in our text, but 
they agree also with the Agni and Brahma in the successors of 
Jayadratha, as Dridharatha or Vrihadratha, and Janamejaya or Viswajit. 

21. Surasena: Vayu. Vikarria: Brahma. 




19. Chapter 


Descendants of Puru. Birth of Bharata, the son of Dushyanta: his sons killed: 
adopts Bharadwaja or Vitatha. Hastin, founder of Hastinapur. Sons of Ajamidha, 
and the races derived from them, as Panchalas, &c. Kripa and Kripi found by 
Santanu. Descendants of Riksha, the son of Ajamidha. Kurukshetra named from 
Kuru. Jarasandha and others, kings of Magadha. 

THE son of Puru was Janamejaya; his son was Prachinvat; his son was Pravira; 
his son was Manasyu; his son was Bhayada his son was Sudyumna his son was 
Bahugava his son was Samyati his son was Ahamyati his son was Raudraswa, 
who had ten sons, Riteyu, Kaksheyu, Sthandileyu, Ghriteyu, Jaleyu, Sthaleyu, 
Santateyu, Dhaneyu, Vaneyu, and Vrateyu. The son of Riteyu was Rantinara, 
whose sons were Tansu, Apratiratha, and Dhmva. The son of the second of these 
was Kanwa, and his son was Medhatithi, from whom the Kariwayana Brahmanas 
descended. Anila was the son of Tansu, and he had four sons, of whom 
Dushyanta was the elder. The son of Dushyanta was the emperor Bharata; a 
verse explanatory of his name is chaunted by the gods; "The mother is only the 
receptacle; it is the father by whom a son is begotten. Cherish thy son, 
Dushyanta; treat not Sakuntala with disrespect. Sons, who are born from the 
paternal loins, rescue their progenitors from the infernal regions. Thou art the 
parent of this boy; Sakuntala has spoken truth." From the expression 'cherish,' 
Bharaswa, the prince was called Bharata. 

Bharata had by different wives nine sons, but they were put to death by their 
own mothers, because Bharata remarked that they bore no resemblance to him, 
and the women were afraid that he would therefore desert them. The birth of his 
sons being thus unavailing, Bharata sacrificed to the Maruts, and they gave him 
Bharadwaja, the son of Vrihaspati by Mamata the wife of Utathya, expelled by 
the kick of Dirghatamas, his half brother, before his time. This verse explains the 
purport of his appellation; "'Silly woman,' said Vrihaspati, 'cherish this child of 
two fathers' (bhara dwa-jam). 'No, Vrihaspati,' replied Mamata, 'do you take care 
of him.' So saying, they both abandoned him; but from their expressions the boy 
was called Bharadwaja." He was also termed Vitatha, in allusion to the 
unprofitable (vitatha) birth of the sons of Bharata. The son of Vitatha was 


Bhavanmanyu his sons were many, and amongst them the chief were 
Vrihatkshatra, Mahaviryya, Nara, and Garga. The son of Nara was Sankriti; his 
sons were Ruchiradhi and Rantideva. The son of Garga was Sini, and their 
descendants called Gargyas and Sainyas, although Kshatriyas by birth, became 
Brahmans. The son of Mahaviryya was Urukshaya, who had three sons, 
Trayyaruna, Pushkarin, and Kapi the last of whom became a Brahman. The son 
of Vrihatkshatra was Suhotra, whose son was Hastin, who founded the city of 
Hastinapur. The sons of Hastin were Ajamidha, Dwimidha, and Purumidha. One 
son of Ajamidha was Kanwa, whose son was Medhatithi his other son was 
Vrihadishu, whose son was Vrihadvasu his son was Vrihatkarman his son was 
Jayadratha his son was Viswajit his son was Senajit, whose sons were 
Ruchiraswa, Kasya, Dridhadhanush, and Vasahanu. The son of Ruchiraswa was 
Prithusena; his son was Para; his son was Nipa; he had a hundred sons, of whom 
Samara, the principal, was the ruler of Kampilya. Samara had three sons, Para, 
Sampara, Sadaswa. The son of Para was Prithu; his son was Sukriti; his son was 
Vibhratra his son was Anuha, who married Kritwi, the daughter of Suka (the son 
of Vyasa), and had by her Brahmadatta his son was Viswaksena; his son was 

r 

Udaksena and his son was Bhallata. 

The son of Dwimidha was Yavinara; his son was Dhritimat his son was 
Satyadhriti; his son was Dridhanemi; his son was Suparswa his son was Sumati; 
his son was Sannatimat; his son was Krita, to whom Hiranyanabha taught the 
philosophy of the Yoga, and he compiled twenty-four Sanhitas (or compendia) 
for the use of the eastern Brahmans, who study the Sama-veda. The son of Krita 
was Ugrayudha, by whose prowess the Nipa race of Kshatriyas was destroyed 
his son was Kshemya; his son was Suvira; his son was Nripanjaya his son was 
Bahuratha. These were all called Pauravas. 

Ajamidha had a wife called Nilini, and by her he had a son named Nila; his son 
was Santi; his son was Susanti; his son was Purujanu his son was Chakshu his 
son was Haryyaswa, who had five sons, Mudgala, Srinjaya, Vrihadishu, Pravira, 
and Kampilya. Their father said, "These my five (pancha) sons are able (alam) to 
protect the countries;" and hence they were termed the Panchalas. From Mudgala 
descended the Maudgalya Brahmans he had also a son named Bahwaswa, who 
had two children, twins, a son and daughter, Divodasa and Ahalya. The son of 
Saradwat or Gautama by Ahalya was Satananda his son was Satyadhriti, who 
was a proficient in military science. Being enamoured of the nymph Urvasi, 



Satyadhriti was the parent of two children, a boy and a girl. Santanu, a Raja, 
whilst hunting, found these children exposed in a clump of long Sara grass; and, 
compassionating their condition, took them, and brought them up. As they were 
nurtured through pity (kripa), they were called Kripa and Kripi. The latter 
became the wife of Drona, and the mother of Aswatthaman. 

The son of Divodasa was Mitrayu his son was Chyavana; his son was Sudasa; 
his son was Saudasa, also called Sahadeva; his son was Somaka; he had a 
hundred sons, of whom Jantu was the eldest, and Prishata the youngest. The son 

r r 

of Prishata was Drupada; his son was Dhrishtadyumna; his son was Drishtaketu. 

Another son of Ajamidha was named Riksha his son was Samvarana; his son 
was Kuru, who gave his name to the holy district Kurukshetra; his sons were 
Sudhanush, Jahnu, Parikshit, and many others. The son of Sudhanush was 
Suhotra; his son was Chyavana; his son was Kritaka his son was Uparichara the 
Vasu, who had seven children, Vrihadratha, Pratyagra, Kusamba, Mavella, 
Matsya, and others. The son of Vrihadratha was Kusagra; his son was Rishabha 
his son was Pushpavat; his son was Satyadhrita his son was Sudhanwan; and his 
son was Jantu. Vrihadratha had another son, who being born in two parts, which 
were put together (sandhita) by a female fiend named Jara, he was denominated 
Jarasandha his son was Sahadeva; his son was Somapi his son was Srutasravas. 
These were kings of Magadha. 




Footnotes 

01. Abhayada: Vayu. Vitamaya: Agni. Vatayudha: Matsya. Charupada: 
Bhagavata. The Mahabharata, Adi P., has two accounts of the 
descendants of Puru, differing materially in the beginning from each 
other, and from the lists of the Puranas. In the first, Pravira is made the 
son of Puru; his son is Manasyu, who has three sons, Sakta, Sanhanana, 
and Vagmin; and there the line stops. Another son of Puru is Raudraswa, 
whose sons are Richeyu and the rest, as in our text; making them the 
second in descent, instead of the eleventh. In the second list, the son of 
Puru is Janamejaya, whose successors are Prachinvat, Samyati, 


Ahamyati, Sarvabhauma, Jayatsena, Avachina, Ariha, Mahabhauma, 
Ayutanayin, Akrodhana, Devatithi, Ariha, Riksha, Matinara, who is 
therefore the fifteenth from Puru, instead of the fourth as in the first 
account, or the twelfth as in the text. 

02. Dhundu: Vayu. Sambhu: Agni. Sudhanwan: Brahma. 

03. Bahuvidha: Agni and Matsya. 

04. Sampati: Agni. 

05. Omitted: Vayu. Bahuvadin: Matsya. 

06. Bhadraswa: Matsya. 

07. Rajeyu: Vayu. Richeyu: Agni. They were the sons of the Apsaras 
Ghritachi: or of Misrakesi: Mahabharata. The Brahma P. and Hari V. 
have very unaccountably, and in opposition to all other authorities, 
transferred the whole of the descendants of Anu to this family; 
substituting for Anu the second name in our text, Kaksheyu. 

08. The Vayu names also ten daughters, Rudra, Sudra, Madra, Subhaga, 
Amalaja, Tala, Khala, Gopajala, Tamrarasa, and Ratnakuti; and adds that 
they were married to Prabhakara, a Rishi of the race of Atri. The Brahma 
P. and Hari V. have a legend of the birth of Soma, the moon, from him 
and one of these ten; who succeeded to the power and prerogatives of 
Atri. The sons of the other wives were less distinguished, but they 
formed families eminent amongst holy Brahmans, called Swastyatreyas. 

09. Atimara or Atibhara: Bhagavata. Antinara: Matsya. Matinara: 
Mahabharata, Agni and Brahma. According to the Matsya and Hari V. 
(not in the Brahma P.), Gauri, the daughter of this prince, was the mother 
of Mandhatri, of the family of Ikshwaku. 

10. In place of these the Matsya has Amurttirayas and Nrichandra, and there 
are several varieties in the nomenclature. In place of the first we have 
Vasu or Trasu, Vayu; Tansurogha, Agni; Tansurodha, Brahma; and 
Sumati, Bhagavata. Pratiratha is read for the second in the Agni and 
Brahma; and for the third, Suratha, Agni; Subahu, Hari V. 

11. Medhatithi is the author of many hymns in the Rig-veda, and we have 
therefore Brahmans and religious teachers descended from Kshatriyas. 

12. Malina: Vayu. Raibhya: Bhagavata. Dharmanetra: Brahma P. The Hari V. 
omits him, making sad blundering work of the whole passage. Thus the 
construction is such as to intimate that Tansu or Tansurodha had a wife 
named Ila, the daughter of Medhatithi; that is, his brother's great- 
granddaughter: but this, as the commentator observes, is contrary to 


common sense, and he would read it therefore, 'The daughter of him who 
was named Ilin;' a Raja so called: but in the Vayu and Matsya we have 
Ilina, the daughter of Yama, married to Tansu, and mother of Malina or 
Anila; more correctly perhaps Ailina. The blunder of the Hari V. 
therefore arises from the compiler's reading Yasya, 'of whom,' instead of 
Yamasya, 'Yama.' It is not an error of transcription, for the metre requires 
Yasya, and the remark of the commentator proves the correctness of the 
reading. The name occurs Ilina, the son of Tansu, in the Mahabharata, 
agreeably to the Anuvansa sloka, which is there quoted. 'Saraswati bore 
Tansu to Matinara, and Tansu begot a son, Ilina, by Kalingi.' 

13. The Vayu, Matsya, and Bhagavata agree with our text in making these 
the grandsons of Tansu: even the Brahma P. concurs, but the Hari V. 
makes them his sons, having apparently transformed Tansosuta, the son 
of Tansu, into a synonyme of Tansu, or Tansurodha; as in these parallel 
passages: 'The son of Tansu was the illustrious sage Dharmanetra: 
Upadanavi had from him four excellent sons.' Brahma P. 'Tansurodha was 
a royal sage, the illustrious institutor of laws. Upadanavi had four sons 
from Tansurodha.' Hari V. The commentator explains Dharmanetra to be 
'institutor of laws.' We have Upadanavi before, as the daughter of 
Vrishaparvan the Daitya, married to Hiranyaksha. Hamilton (Buchanan) 
calls her the wife of Sughora. The four sons are named in other 
authorities, with some variations: Dushyanta, Sushyanta or Rishyanta or 
Sumanta, Pravira and Anagha or Naya. The Mahabharata enumerates 
five, Dushyanta, Sura, Bhima, Vasu, and Pravasu, but makes them the 
sons of Ilina and grandsons of Tansu. 

14. These two Slokas are taken from the Mahabharata, Adi Parvan, and are 
part of the testimony borne by a heavenly messenger to the birth of 
Bharata. They are repeated in the same book, in the account of the family 
of Puru. They occur, with a slight variation of the order, in other Puranas, 
as the Vayu, &c., and shew the greater antiquity of the story of 
Sakuntala, although they do not narrate it. The meaning of the name 
Bharata is differently explained in Sakuntala; he is said to be so called 
from supporting' the world: he is also there named Sarvadamana, 'the 
conqueror of all.' 

15. The Brahma P. and Hari V., the latter especially, appear to have modified 
this legend, with the view perhaps of reconciling those circumstances 
which are related of Bharadwaja as a sage with his history as a king. 


Whilst therefore they state that Bharadwaja was brought by the winds to 
Bharata, they state that he was so brought to perform a sacrifice, by 
which a son was born, whom Bharadwaja also inaugurated. In the Vayu, 
Matsya, and Agni, however, the story is much more consistently 
narrated; and Bharadwaja, being abandoned by his natural parent, is 
brought by the winds, as a child, not as a sage; and being adopted by 
Bharata, is one and the same with Vitatha, as our text relates. Thus in the 
Vayu, the Maruts bring to Bharata, already sacrificing for progeny, 
Bharadwaja, the son of Vrihaspati; and Bharata receiving him, says, 
"This Bharadwaja shall be Vitatha." The Matsya also says, the Maruts in 
compassion took the child, and being pleased with Bharata's worship, 
gave it to him, and he was named Vitatha. And the Agni tells the whole 
story in one verse: 'Then the son of Vrihaspati, being taken by the winds; 
Bharadwaja was transferred with sacrifice, and was Vitatha.' The account 
given in the Bhagavata is to the same purpose. The commentator on the 
text also makes the matter clear enough: 'The name of Bharadwaja in the 
condition of son of Bharata was Vitatha.' It is clear that a new-born infant 
could not be the officiating priest at a sacrifice for his own adoption, 
whatever the compiler of the Hari Vansa may please to assert. From 
Bharadwaja, a Brahman by birth, and king by adoption, descended 
Brahmans and Kshatriyas, the children of two fathers: The Mahabharata, 
in the Adi Parvan, tells the story very simply. In one place, v. 3710, it 
says that Bharata, on the birth of his children proving vain, obtained from 
Bharadwaja, by great sacrifices, a son, Bhumanyu; and in another 
passage it makes Bhumanyu the son of Bharata by Sunanda, daughter of 
Sarvasena, king of Kasi. v. 3785. The two are not incompatible. 

16. Manyu: Bhagavata. Suketu: Agni. But the Brahma and Hari V. omit this 
and the next generation, and make Suhotra, Anuhotra, Gaya, Garga, and 
Kapila the sons of Vitatha: they then assign to Suhotra two sons, Kasika 
and Ghritsamati, and identify them and their descendants with the 
progeny of Ayu, who were kings of Kasi a piece of confusion 
unwarranted by any other authority except the Agni. 

17. Vrihat, Aharya, Nara, Garga: Matsya. 

18. Guruvirya and Trideva: Vayu. The first is called Gurudhi, Matsya; and 
Guru, Bhagavata: they agree in Rantideva. The Bhagavata describes the 
great liberality of this prince, and his practice of Yoga. According to a 
legend preserved in the Megha Duta, his sacrifices of kine were so 


numerous, that their blood formed the river Charmanvati, the modern 
Chambal. 

19. Sivi: Matsya. 

20. The other authorities concur in this statement; thus furnishing an 
additional instance of one caste proceeding from another. No reason is 
assigned: the commentator says it was from some cause. 

21. Durbhakshaya: Vayu. Urukshat: Matsya. Duritakshaya: Bhagavata. 

22. Trayyaruni, Pushkararuni, Kavi; all became Brahmans: ### Matsya: and 
there were three chief branches of the Kavyas, or descendants of Kavi; 
### Gargas, Sankritis, and Kavyas. Ibid. 

23. In the Mahabharata, Suhotra is the son of Bhumanyu; and in one place 
the father of Ajamidha, &c., and in another of Hastin. The Brahma P. in 
some degree, and the Hari Vansa in a still greater, have made most 
extraordinary confusion in the instance of this name. In our text and in all 
the best authorities we have three Suhotras, perfectly distinct: 1. Suhotra 
great-grandson of Amavasu, father of Jahnu, and ancestor of Viswamitra 
and the Kausikas 2. Suhotra son of Kshatravriddha, and grandson of 
Ayus, and progenitor of the race of Kasi kings and 3. Suhotra the son of 
Vrihatkshatra, grandson of Vitatha, and parent of Hastin. In the two 
blundering compilations mentioned, we have, first (Hari V. c. 20), a 
Suhotra son of Vrihatkshatra, of the race of Puru; his descent is not given, 
but, from the names which follow Suhotra, the dynasty is that of our 
present text: secondly (Hari V. c. 27), Suhotra son of Kanchana, of the 
line of Amavasu, and father of Jahnu, &c.: thirdly (Hari V. c. 29), Suhotra 
the son of Kshatravriddha, and progenitor of the Kasi kings: fourthly 
(Hari V. 32), we have the first and third of these personages confounded; 
Suhotra is made the son of Vitatha, and progenitor of the Kasi kings, the 
dynasty of whom is repeated; thus connecting them with the line of Puru 
instead of Ayus, in opposition to all authority. Again, we have a notable 
piece of confusion, and Suhotra the son of Vitatha is made the father of 
Vrihat, the father of the three princes who in our text and in the Hari V. 
(c. 20) are the sons of Hastin; and amongst whom Ajamidha is made the 
father of Jahnu, and ancestor of the Kausikas, instead of being, as in c. 
27, and as every where else, of the family of Amavasu. The source of all 
this confusion is obvious. The compilers extracted all the authentic 
traditions accurately enough, but, puzzled by the identity of name, they 
have also mixed the different accounts together, and caused very absurd 



and needless perplexity. It is quite clear also that the Hari Vanua does not 
deserve the pains taken, and taken fruitlessly, by Mr. Hamilton and M. 
Langlois to reduce it to consistency. It is of no weight whatever as an 
authority for the dynasties of kings, although it furnishes some particular 
details, which it has picked up possibly from authentic sources not now 
available. 

24. It was finally ruined by the encroachments of the Ganges, but vestiges of 
it were, at least until lately, to be traced along the river, nearly in a line 
with Delhi, about sixty miles to the east. 

25. In one place, son of Suhotra; in another, grandson of Hastin: 
Mahabharata. 

26. The copies agree in this reading, yet it can scarcely be correct. Kanwa 
has already been noticed as the son of Apratiratha. According to the 
Bhagavata, the elder son of Ajamidha was Priyamedhas, from whom a 
tribe of Brahmans descended. The Matsya has Vrihaddhanush, and names 
the wife of Ajamidha, Dhumini. It also however, along with the Vayu, 
makes Kanwa the son of Ajamidha by his wife Kesini. 

27. Vrihaddhanush: Bhagavata. Also called Vrihaddharman: Hari V. 

28. Vrihatkaya: Bhagavata. 

29. Satyajit: Hari V. 

30. Aswajit: Matsya. Visada: Bhagavata. 

31. 


Bhagavata. 

Matsya. 

Hari V. 

Ruchiraswa 

Ruchiraswa 

Ruchira 

Kasya 

Kasya 

Swetaketu 

Dridhahanu 

Dridhaswa 

Mahimnara 

Vatsa 

Vatsa k. of Avanti. 

Vatsa k. of Avanti. 


32. Kampilya appears to be the Kampil of the Mohammedans, situated in the 
Doab. It was included in southern Panchala. The Matsya makes Samara 
the son of Kasya. 

33. Vibhraja in MSS., also in the Vayu. 

34. The Bhagavata omits the descents subsequent to Nipa, and makes 
Brahmadatta the son of Nipa by Sukriti. In the Hari V. is a curious legend 
of the different transmigrations of Brahmadatta and his six companions, 
who were successively as many Brahmans, then foresters, then p. 453 
deer, then water-fowl, then swans, and finally Brahmans again, when 




















with the king they obtained liberation. According to the Bhagavata, 
Brahmadatta composed a treatise on the Yoga, a Yoga tantra. 

35. Dandasena: Hari V. 

36. Bhallaka: Vayu. Bhallada: Bhagavata. The Vayu makes him the last of 
the race. The Hari V. adds that he was killed by Kama. The Matsya 
names his successor Janamejaya, when the race of the Nipas was 
exterminated by Ugrayudha; as noticed below. 

37. So the Vayu and Bhagavata. The Matsya and Hari V., with less 
consistency, derive this family also from Ajamidha. 

38. Kritimat: Bhagavata. 

39. Between these two the Vayu inserts Mahat and Rukmaratha. The Matsya, 
Sudhanwan, Sarvabhauma, Mahapaurava, and Rukmadhara. The Brahma 
R, Sudharman, Sarvabhauma, Mahat, and Rukmaratha. 

40. The Bhagavata says he was the author of six Sanhitas of the Sama-veda. 

41. The Hari V. says he killed Nipa, the grandfather of Prishata, but it had 
previously stated that it was the son of Bhallata, several descents after 
Nipa, who was killed by Ugrayudha: and again (c. 32), Prishata, 
conformably to other authorities, appears as the father of Drupada, in the 
family of Srinjaya. The Hari V. relates the destruction of Ugrayudha by 
Bhishma, in consequence of his demanding in marriage the widow of 
Santanu: after which, Prishata, it is said, recovered possession of 
Kampilya. 

42. Puranjaya: Bhagavata. 

43. Purujati: Vayu. Puruja: Bhagavata. The Brahma P. and Hari V. omit Nila 
and Santi. 

44. Riksha: Vayu. Prithu: Matsya. Arka: Bhagavata. Omitted: Brahma. 

45. Bahyaswa: Agni. Bhadraswa: Mats. Bharmyaswa: Bhagavata. 

46. Jaya: Matsya. Sanjaya: Bhagavata. 

47. Yavinara: Agni and Bhagavata. Javinara: Matsya. 

48. Kapila: Mats. Krimilaswa: Brahma. 

49. Panchala was at first the country north and west of Delhi, between the 
foot of the Himalaya and the Chambal. It was afterwards divided into 
northern and southern Panchala, separated by the Ganges. Makandi on 
the Ganges and Kampilya were the chief cities of the latter; Ahikshetra in 
the former. The Panchalas, according to the Mahabharata, expelled 
Samvarana from Hastinapur, but it was recovered by Kuru. The purport 
of the term Panchala is similarly explained in other Puranas. In the 


Mahabharata they are the grandsons of Ajamidha. 

50. The Matsya says that they, as well as the Kariwas, were all followers or 
partisans of Angiras: ###. The Hari V. has nearly the same words. 

51. Badhryaswa: Vayu. Panchaswa: Agni. Bandhyaswa: Matsya. Bharmya: 
Bhagavata. But there is some indistinctness as to his descent. The Matsya 
and Hari V. give the son of Mudgala only his patronymic Maudgalya. 
According to the first, his son was Indrasena; and his son, Bandhyaswa. 
The second makes Badhryaswa the son of Maudgalya by Indrasena. The 
Bhagavata makes Bharmya, the patronymic of Mudgala, the son of 
Bharmyaswa, and who is the father of Divodasa and Ahalya: ###. The 
commentator has, ###. 

52. In the Ramayaria, Satananda appears as the family priest of Janaka, the 
father of Sita. 

53. From whom the Maitreya Brahmans were descended: Hari V. In the 
Matsya and Agni the son of Mitrayu is called Maitreya. The Brahma P. 
and Hari V. here close the lineage of Divodasa: the Agni adds but one 
name, Somapi. They then proceed with the descendants of Srinjaya, one 
of the Panchalas, or Panchadhanush, Somadatta, Sahadeva, and then as in 
our text. The Vayu and Bhagavata agree with the latter in making the line 
continuous from Divodasa. According to the Matsya and Brahma P. the 
race of Ajamidha became extinct in the person of Sahadeva, but 
Ajamidha himself was reborn as Somaka, in order to continue his 
lineage, which was thence called the Somaka family. It was in the reign 
of Drupada that the possessions of the Panchalas were divided; Droria, 
assisted by the Paridavas, conquering the country, and ceding the 
southern portion again to Drupada, as related in the Mahabharata. The 
two princes last named in the list figure in the great war. 

54. The Hari V. gives him two brothers, Dhumravarria and Sudarsana. In the 
Mahabharata one list agrees with the text; the other calls Samvararia the 
son of Ajamidha by his wife Riksha. 

55. One other is named in the Bhagavata, Matsya, Brahma, and Agni; 
Animejaya, Arimarddana, and Nishadhaswa. The Hari V. has Sudhanwat 
in place of Jahnu; having also Sudhanush. 

56. Krita: Vayu. Kritayajna: Brahma. Krimi: Matsya. Kriti: Bhagavata. 

57. The story of Uparichara, or a Vasu who by command of Indra became 
king of Chedi, is told in the Mahabharata, Adi Parvan (vol. I.). He is 
there said to have at first five sons, Vrihadratha, king of Magadha, 





Pratyagra, Kusamba, also called Manivahana, Mavella, and Yadu, by his 
wife Girika; afterwards he has, by Adrika, an Apsaras condemned to the 
form of a fish, Matsya a son, and Satyavati or Kali a daughter: the latter 
was the mother of Vyasa. The same legend is referred to in the accounts 
of Uparichara and his family in the Bhagavata, Matsya, Hari V., &c. 

58. Vrishabha: Matsya. 

59. Satyahita: Vayu. Satyahita: Bhagavata. Satyadhrita or Pushya: Matsya. 

60. This story is told in the 16th section of the Sabha Parvan of the 
Mahabharata, where also he is called the son of Vrihadratha. In the Vayu 
he is the son of Satyahita. The Agni has Satyahita, Urjja, Sambhava, 
Jarasandha; and the Matsya, Satyadhrita, Dhanusha, Sarva, Sambhava, 
Jarasandha. 

61. Somadhi: Vayu. Udapi: Agni. Udayus: Brahma. Somavit: Matsya. 

62. Srutakarman: Agni. Srutasarman Brahma. 




20. Chapter 


Descendants of Kuru. Devapi abdicates the throne: assumed by Santanu: he is 
confirmed by the Brahmans: Bhishma his son by Ganga: his other sons. Birth of 
Dhritarashtra, Pandu, and Vidura. The hundred sons of Dhritarashtra. The five 
sons of Pandu: married to Draupadi: their posterity. Parikshit, the grandson of 
Arjuna, the reigning king. 

PARIKSHIT, the son of Kuru, had four sons, Janamejaya, Srutasena, Ugrasena, 
and Bhimasena. The son of Jahnu was Suratha; his son was Viduratha; his son 
was Sarvabhauma; his son was Jayasena Aravin; his son was Ayutayus; his son 
was Akrodhana; one of his sons was Devatithi, and another was called Riksha; 
his son was Dilipa; his son was Pratipa, who had three sons, Devapi, Santanu, 
and Bahlika. The first adopted in childhood a forest life, and Santanu became 
king. Of him this verse is spread through the earth; "Santanu is his name, 
because if he lays his hands upon an old man, he restores him to youth, and by 
him men obtain tranquillity (santi)." 

In the kingdom over which Santanu ruled there was no rain for twelve years. 
Apprehensive that the country would become a desert, the king assembled the 
Brahmans, and asked them why no rain fell, and what fault he had committed. 
They told him that he was as it were a younger brother married before an elder, 
for he was in the enjoyment of the earth, which was the right of his elder brother 
Devapi. "What then am I to do?" said the Raja: to which they replied, "Until the 
gods shall be displeased with Devapi, by his declining from the path of 
righteousness, the kingdom is his, and to him therefore you should resign it." 
When the minister of the king, Asmarisarin, heard this, he collected a number of 
ascetics who taught doctrines opposed to those of the Vedas, and sent them into 
the forest; where meeting with Devapi, they perverted the understanding of the 
simple-minded prince, and led him to adopt heretical notions. In the meantime, 
Santanu being much distressed to think that he had been guilty of the offence 
intimated by the Brahmans, sent them before him into the woods, and then 
proceeded thither himself, to restore the kingdom to his elder brother. When the 
Brahmans arrived at the hermitage of Devapi, they informed him, that, according 
to the doctrines of the Vedas, succession to a kingdom was the right of the elder 


brother: but he entered into discussion with them, and in various ways advanced 
arguments which had the defect of being contrary to the precepts of the Vedas. 
When the Brahmans heard this, they turned to Santanu, and said, "Come hither, 
Raja; you need give yourself no further trouble in this matter; the dearth is at an 
end: this man is fallen from his state, for he has uttered words of disrespect to 
the authority of the eternal, untreated Veda; and when the elder brother is 
degraded, there is no sin in the prior espousals of his junior." Santanu thereupon 
returned to his capital, and administered the government as before; and his elder 
brother Devapi being degraded from his caste by repeating doctrines contrary to 
the Vedas, Indra poured down abundant rain, which was followed by plentiful 
harvests. 

The son of Bahlika was Somadatta, who had three sons, Bhuri, Bhurisravas, and 
Sala. 

The son of Santanu was the illustrious and learned Bhishma, who was born to 
him by the holy river-goddess, Ganga; and he had by his wife Satyavati two 
sons, Chitrangada and Vichitraviryya. Chitrangada, whilst yet a youth, was killed 
in a conflict with a Gandharba, also called Chitrangada. Vichitraviryya married 
Amba and Ambalika, the daughters of the king of Kasi; and indulging too freely 
in connubial rites, fell into a consumption, of which he died. By command of 
Satyavati, my son Krishria-dwaipayana, ever obedient to his mother's wishes, 

r r 

begot upon the widows of his brother the princes Dhritarashtra and Pandu, and 

r 

upon a female servant, Vidura. Dhritarashtra had Duryodhana, Duhsasana, and 

r 

other sons, to the cumber of a hundred. Pandu having incurred the curse of a 
deer, whose mate he had killed in the chase, was deterred from procreating 
children; and his wife Kunti, bare to him in consequence three sons, who were 

r 

begotten by the deities Dharma, Vayu, and Indra; namely, Yudhishthira, Bhima, 
and Arjuna: and his wife Madri had two sons, Nakula and Sahadeva, by the 
celestial sons of Aswini. These had each a son by Draupadi. The son of 

r r r 

Yudhishthira was Prativindhya; of Bhima, Srutasoma; of Arjuna, Srutakirtti; of 

r r r 

Nakula, Satanika; and of Sahadeva, Srutakarman. The Paridavas had also other 
sons. By his wife Yaudheyi, Yudhishthira had Devaka. The son of Bhima by 
Hidimba was Ghatotkacha, and he had also Sarvatraga by his wife Kasi. The son 
of Sahadeva by Vijaya was Suhotra; and Niramitra was the son of Nakula by 
Kareriumati. Arjuna had Iravat by the serpent-nymph Ulupi; Babhruvahana, who 
was adopted as the son of his maternal grandfather, by the daughter of the king 



of Manipura; and, by his wife Subhadra Abhimanyu, who even in extreme youth 
was renowned for his valour and his strength, and crushed the chariots of his 
foes in fight. The son of Abhimanyu by his wife Uttara was Parikshit, who, after 
the Kurus were all destroyed, was killed in his mother's womb by the magic 
Brahma weapon, hurled by Aswatthaman: he was however restored to life by the 
clemency of that being whose feet receive the homage of all the demons and the 
gods, and who for his own pleasure had assumed a human shape (Krishna). This 
prince, Parikshit, now reigns over the whole world with undivided sway. 


Footnotes 

01. This, although it occurs in other authorities, appears to be an error, for 
these are the sons of a subsequent Parikshit (see the next chapter). The 
Matsya omits Parikshit here, and the Bhagavata states that he had no 
children. In most of the Puranas, however, the line of Parikshit is 
continued, but there is very great confusion in the lineage. According to 
the Vayu, Janamejaya was the son of Parikshit, whose son was Srutasena, 
whose son was Bhimasena. Janamejaya had also a son named Suratha; 
but Suratha was also the name of the son of Jahnu, from whom the line 
continues as in the text. The Brahma P. and Hari V. also make Suratha the 
son both of Janamejaya and of Jahnu; and they observe that there are two 
Rikshas, two Parikshits, three Bhimasenas, and two Janamejayas, in the 
lunar race. Some of the confusion probably originates with the 
Mahabharata, which, as before noticed, gives two lists from Puru to 
Santanu, differing from one another and from all the lists of the Puranas. 
In the first of these lists such collateral names have been retained as 
appear to have furnished our text and that of other Puranas with distinct 
persons: thus making the members of one fraternity so many descents. Of 
the two lists, however, the second is probably to be regarded as the more 
recent, if not more correct; for Vaisampayana repeats it at Janamejaya's 
request, because the latter is not satisfied with the summary account 
which the former had first communicated to him. Mahabh. vol. I. 

02. The Mahabharata merely states that Devapi retired to a religious life. The 
story of his heresy is narrated, much as in the text, in the Bhagavata, 


Vayu, &c. The Matsya adds, that he was also leprous; on which account 
his subjects contemned him. He was probably set aside in favour of his 
younger brother, either on that account or on that of his heresy; such a 
disposition being conformable to Hindu law. According to the Bhagavata 
and Matsya he is still alive at a place called Kalapa grama, where, in the 
Krita age of the next Mahayuga, he will be the restorer of the Kshatriya 
race. 

03. The Matsya says that Bahlika had a hundred sons or lords of the 
Bahlikas. 

04. Before her marriage to Santanu, Satyavati had a son, Krishna- 
dwaipayana or Vyasa, by Parasara: he was therefore the half brother of 
Vichitraviryya, and legally qualified to raise up offspring to him by his 
widow. This law is abrogated in the present age. The whole story of the 
sons of Santanu is told at length in the Mahabharata. 

05. The Mahabharata names some of them rather differently, and adds some 
particulars. Thus Yaudheya was the son of Yudhishthira by his wife 
Devika, daughter of Govasana of the Saivya tribe. The son of Bhimasena 
was Sarvaga, by Balandhara, princess of Kasi; he had also Ghatokkacha 
by Hidimba. Abhimanyu was the son of Arjuna by Subhadra. The wives 
and sons of the other two are the same, but Karenumati is termed a 
princess of Chedi, and Vijaya of Madra. 

06. In the details immediately preceding, the Puranas generally concur, 
deriving them probably from the same source, the Adi Parvan of the 
Mahabharata, and employing very frequently the same words. The period 
at which the chapter closes is supposed to be that at which the Vyasa, 
who arranged or compiled the Puranas, is believed to have flourished. 
Parlkshit died of the bite of a snake, according to the Mahabharata, Adi P. 
The Bhagavata is supposed to have been narrated to him in the interval 
between the bite and its fatal effect. 




21. Chapter 


Future kings. Descendants of Parikshit, ending with Kshemaka. 

I WILL now enumerate the kings who, will reign in future periods. The present 
monarch, Parikshit, will have four sons, Janamejaya, Srutasena, Ugrasena, and 
Bhimasena. The son of Janamejaya will be Satanika, who will study the Vedas 
under Yajnyawalkya, and military science with Kripa; but becoming dissatisfied 
with sensual enjoyments, he will acquire spiritual knowledge from the 
instructions of Saunaka, and ultimately obtain salvation. His son will be 
Aswamedhadatta (a son given by the gods in reward for the sacrifice of a horse); 
his son will be Asima-krishna his son will be Nichakra, who will remove the 
capital to Kausambi, in consequence of Hastinapura being washed away by the 
Ganges; his son will be Ushna his son will be Chitraratha; his son will be 
Vrishnimat his son will be Sushena; his son will be Sunitha his son will be Richa 
his son will be Nrichakshu his son will be Sukhihala his son will be Pariplava; 
his son will be Sunaya his son will be Medhavin; his son will be Nripanjaya his 
son will be Mridu his son will be Tigma his son will be Vrihadratha; his son will 
be Vasudana and his son will be another Satanika; his son will be Udayana his 
son will be Ahinara his son will be Khandapani his son will be Niramitra his son 
will be Kshemaka of him this verse is recited; "The race which gave origin to 
Brahmans and Kshatriyas, and which was purified by regal sages, terminated 
with Kshemaka; in the Kali age." 


Footnotes 

01. The style now adopted is that of prophecy, as Vyasa could not 
consistently have recorded the events which were posterior to his time. 

02. Also read Parikshita, Pariksha, and Parikshi. 

03. The Vayu and Matsya relate, rather obscurely, a dispute between 
Janamejaya and Vaisampayana, in consequence of the former's patronage 
of the Brahmans of the Vajasaneyi branch of the Yajur-veda, in 


opposition to the latter, who was the author of the black or original 
Yajush. Janamejaya twice performed the Aswamedha according to the 
Vajasaneyi ritual, and established the Trisarvl, or use of certain texts by 
Asmaka and others, by the Brahmans of Anga, and by those of the 
middle country. He perished however in consequence, being cursed by 
Vaisampayana. Before their disagreement, Vaisampayana related the 
Mahabharata to Janamejaya. Mahabh., Adi Parvan. 

04. The reading of the text is rather, 'his (Parikshit's) other son will be 
Satanika;' but the commentator refers 'his' to Janamejaya. The Vayu, 
Matsya, and Bhagavata also make Satanika the son of Janamejaya. The 
Brahma P. has a totally different series, or Parikshit, Suryapida, 
Chandrapida, Janamejaya, Satyakarna, Swetakarna, Sukumara, and 
Ajasyama. 

05. The Bhagavata interposes Sahasranika. The Vrihatkatha has the same 
descent, but calls the son of Sahasranika, Udayana or Vatsa. The 
Bhagavata has Aswamedhaja. 

06. Adhisama k.: Vayu. Adhisoma k.: Matsya. The former states that the 
Vayu P. was narrated in this king's reign, in the second year of a three 
years' sacrifice at Kurukshetra. 

07. Nemichakra: Bhagav. Vichakshus: Matsya. They agree with the text as to 
the removal of the capital, and the cause. 

08. Ukta: Bhag. Bhurijyeshtha: Matsya. 

09. Suchidratna, Vayu; Suchidrava, Mats.; Kaviratha, Bhag.; is interposed 
between Chitraratha and Vrishnimat. 

10. Sutirtha: Vayu. 

11. Ruchi: Vayu. Omitted: Mats, and Bhag. 

12. Chitraksha: Vayu. 

13. Sukhinala: Bhag. 

14. Sutapas: Mats. 

15. Puranjaya: Mats. 

16. Urva: Mats. Durva: Bhag. 

17. Tigmatman: Mats. Timi: Bhagavata. 

18. Sudasa: Bhag. Vasudaman: Mats. 

19. The Matsya concurs with the text (see above, note 5); the Bhagavata has 
Durdamana. 

20. Vahinara: Bhag. 

21. Dandapani: Bhag., Vayu, Mats. 


22. Nimi: Bhag. 

23. Kshepaka: Vayu. 

24. The same memorial verse is quoted in the Matsya and Vayu P., preceded 
by one which states the number of princes twenty-five. The specification 
however, commencing with Satanika, is twenty-six or twenty-seven. The 
passage is, ###. 





22. Chapter 


Future kings of the family of Ikshwaku, ending with Sumitra. 

I WILL now repeat to you the future princes of the family of Ikshwaku. 

The son of Vrihadbala will be Vrihatkshaha his son will be Urukshepa his son 
will be Vatsa his son will be Vatsavyuha his son will be Prativyoman his son will 
be Divakara; his son will be Sahadeva his son will be Vrihadaswa his son will be 
Bhanuratha his son will be Supratitha his son will be Marudeva his son will be 
Sunakshatra; his son will be Kinnara his son will be Antariksha; his son will be 
Suvarna his son will be Amitrajit his son will be Vrihadraja his son will be 
Dharman his son will be Kritanjaya; his son will be Rananjaya; his son will be 
Sanjaya; his son will be Sakya his son will be Suddhodana his son will be Ratula 
his son will be Prasenajit; his son will be Kshudraka; his son will be Kundaka 
his son will be Suratha his son will be Sumitra. These are the kings of the family 
of Ikshwaku, descended from Vrihadbala. This commemorative verse is current 
concerning them; "The race of the descendants of Ikshwaku will terminate with 
Sumitra: it will end in the Kali age with him." 


Footnotes 


01. Vrihadratha: Vayu, 

02. Vrihatkshaya: Vayu. Vrihadrana: Bhag. Omitted: Mats. 

03. Omitted: Vayu. Urukshaya: Mats. Urukriya: Bhag. 

04. Omitted by all three. 

05. Vatsavriddha: Bhag. 

06. Prativyuha: Vayu. 

07. The Bhagavata inserts Bhanu. The Matsya says that Ayodhya was the 
capital of Divakara. The Vayu omits the next twelve names; probably a 
defect in the copies. 

08. Dhruvaswa: Mats. 


09. Bhanumat: Bhag. Bhavyaratha or Bhavya: Mats. 

10. Pratikaswa: Bhag. Pratipaswa: Mats. 

11. The Bhagavata and Matsya prefix a Supratipa or Supratika. 

12. Pushkara: Bhag. 

13. Suparvan or Sumantra: Mats. Sutapas: Bhag. 

14. Amantravit: Matsya. 

15. Vrihadbraja: Bhag, 

16. Omitted: Mats. Varhish: Bhag. 

17. The Bhagavata and Vayu have Sakya. My copy of the Matsya has 
Sadhya, but the Radcliffe MS., more correctly, no doubt, Sakya. 

18. In some copies Krodhodana; but it is also Suddhodana, Mats, and Vayu; 
Suddhoda, Bhag. 

19. Rahula: Vayu. Siddhartha or Pushkala: Mats. Langala: Bhag. This and 
the two preceding names are of considerable chronological interest; for 
Sakya is the name of the author or reviver of Buddhism, whose birth 
appears to have occurred in the seventh, and death in the sixth century 
before Christ (B. C. 621-543). There can be no doubt of the individual 
here intended, although he is out of his place, for he was the son, not the 
father, of Suddhodana, and the father of Rahula; as he is termed in the 
Amara and Haima Koshas, Saudhodani or Suddhodana suta the son of 
Suddhodana, and Rahulasu the parent of Rahula: so also in the 
Mahawanso, Siddhartha or Sakya is the son of Suddhodano, and father of 
Rahulo. Tumour's translation. Whether they are rightly included amongst 
the princes of the race of Ikshwaku is more questionable; for Suddhodana 
is usually described as a petty prince, whose capital was not Ayodhya, 
but Kapila or Kapilavastu. At the same time it appears that the provinces 
of the Doab had passed into the possession of princes of the lunar line, 
and the children of the sun may have been reduced to the country north 
of the Ganges, or the modern Gorakhpur, in which Kapila was situated. 
The Buddhists do usually consider their teacher Sakya to be descended 
from Ikshwaku. The chronology is less easily adjusted, but it is not 
altogether incompatible. According to the lists of the text, Sakya, as the 
twenty-second of the line of Ikshwaku, is cotemporary with Ripunjaya, 
the twenty-second and last of the kings of Magadha, of the family of 
Jarasandha; but, agreeably to the Buddhist authorities, he was the friend 
of Bimbasara, a king who in the Pauranik list appears to be the fifth of 
the Saisunaga dynasty, and tenth from Ripunjaya. The same number of 


princes does not necessarily imply equal duration of dynasty, and 
Ikshwaku's descendants may have outlasted those of Jarasandha; or, as is 
more likely—for the dynasty was obscure, and is evidently imperfectly 
preserved—several descents may have been omitted, the insertion of 
which would reconcile the Pauranik lists with those of the Buddhists, and 
bring Sakya down to the age of Bimbasara. It is evident, from what 
occurs in other authorities, that the Aikshwakava princes are regarded as 
cotemporaries even of the Saisunaga dynasty: see c. 24. n. 17. 

20. Kshulika: Vayu. Kulaka or Kshullaka: Mats. Omitted: Bhag. In the 
Mahavira Charitra, a work written by the celebrated Hemachandra, in the 
twelfth century, we have a Prasenajit, king of Magadha, residing at 
Rajgriha, succeeded by Srenika, and he by Kulika. The Bauddhas have a 
Prasenajit cotemporary with Sakya, son of Mahapadma, king of 
Magadha. There is some confusion of persons either in the Pauranik 
genealogies or in the Buddhist and Jain traditions, but they agree in 
bringing the same names together about the same period. 

21. Omitted: Bhag. 

22. The Vayu and Bhagavata have the same stanza. We have here twenty- 
nine or thirty princes of the later solar line, cotemporary with the 
preceding twenty-six or twenty-seven of the later dynasty of the moon. 




23. Chapter 


Future kings of Magadha: descendants of Vrihadratha. 

I WILL now relate to you the descendants of Vrihadratha, who will be the kings 
of Magadha. There have been several powerful princes of this dynasty, of whom 
the most celebrated was Jarasandha; his son was Sahadeva; his son is Somapi his 
son will be Srutavat his son will be Ayutayus his son will be Niramitra his son 
will be Sukshatra his son will be Vrihatkarman his son will be Senajit his son 
will be Srutanjaya his son will be Vipra his son will be Suchi his son will be 
Kshemya his son will be Suvrata his son will be Dharma his son will be Susuma 
his son will be Dridhasena his son will be Sumati his son will be Suvala his son 
will be Sunita his son will be Satyajit his son will be Viswajit his son will be 
Ripunjaya. These are the Varhadrathas, who will reign for a thousand years. 


Footnotes 

01. Somadhi; Vayu, Matsya: and they now affect greater precision, giving 
the years of the reigns. Somadhi 58, V.; 50, M. 

02. Srutasravas, 67 yrs. V.; 64, M, 

03. 36 yrs. V.; Apratipa, 26, M. 

04. 100 yrs. V.; 40, M. 

05. 8 yrs. V.; 56, M.; Sunakshatra, Bhag. 

06. 23 yrs. V. and M.; Vrihatsena, Bhag. 

07. 23 yrs. V.; 50, M.; Karmajit, Bhag. 

08. 40 yrs. V. and M. 

09. Mahabala, 25 yrs. V.; Vidhu, 28, M. 

10. 58 yrs. V.; 64, M. 

11. 28 yrs. V. and M. 

12. 60 yrs. V.; 64, M. 

13. 5 yrs. V.; Sunetra, 35, M.; Dharmanetra, Bhag. 

14. 38 yrs. V.; Nivritti, 58, M.; Sama, Bhag. 


15. 48 yrs. V.; Trinetra, 28, M.; Dyumatsena, Bhag. 

16. 33 yrs. V.; Mahatsena, 48, M. 

17. 22 yrs. V.; Netra, 33, M. 

18. 40 yrs. V.; Abala, 32, M. 

19. 80 yrs. V.; omitted, M. 

20. 35 yrs. V.; omitted, M. 

21. 50 yrs. V. and M.; Puranjaya and Viswajit are identified, Bhag. 

22. Our list and that of the Vayu specifies twenty-one kings after Sahadeva: 
the Bhagavata specifies twenty, and in another passage states that to be 
the number. My copy of the Matsya names but nineteen, and the 
Radcliffe but twelve; but both agree in making the total thirty-two. They 
all concur with the text also in stating that 1000 years had elapsed from 
the great war, at the death of the last Varhadratha prince; and this is more 
worthy of credit than the details, which are obviously imperfect. 




24. chapter 


Future kings of Magadha. Five princes of the line of Pradyota. Ten Saisunagas. 
Nine Nandas. Ten Mauryas. Ten Sungas. Four Kanwas. Thirty Andhrabhrityas. 
Kings of various tribes and castes, and periods of their rule. Ascendancy of 
barbarians. Different races in different regions. Period of universal iniquity and 
decay. Coming of Vishnu as Kalki. Destruction of the wicked, and restoration of 
the practices of the Vedas. End of the Kali, and return of the Krita, age. Duration 
of the Kali. Verses chanted by Earth, and communicated by Asita to Janaka. End 
of the fourth book. 

THE last of the Vrihadratha dynasty, Ripunjaya, will have a minister named 
Sunika, who having killed his sovereign, will place his son Pradyota upon the 
throne his son will be Palaka his son will be Visakhayupa his son will be Janaka 
and his son will be Nandivarddhana. These five kings of the house of Pradyota 
will reign over the earth for a hundred and thirty-eight years. 

The next prince will be Sisunaga his son will be Kakavarna his son will be 
Kshemadharman his son will be Kshatraujas his son will be Vidmisara his son 
will be Ajatasatru his son will be Dharbaka his son will be Udayaswa his son 
will also be Nandivarddhana; and his son will be Mahanandi. These ten 
Saisunagas will be kings of the earth for three hundred and sixty-two years. 

The son of Mahananda will be born of a woman of the Sudra or servile class; his 
name will be Nanda, called Mahapadma, for he will be exceedingly avaricious. 
Like another Parasurama, he will be the annihilator of the Kshatriya race; for 
after him the kings of the earth will be Sudras. He will bring the whole earth 
under one umbrella: he will have eight sons, Sumalya and others, who will reign 
after Mahapadma; and he and his sons will govern for a hundred years. The 

r 

Brahman Kautilya will root out the nine Nandas Upon the cessation of the race 

r 

of Nanda, the Mauryas will possess the earth, for Kantilya will place 
Chandragupta on the throne: his son will be Vindusara his son will be 
Asokavarddhana his son will be Suyasas his son will be Dasaratha; his son will 
be Sangata; his son will be Salisuka; his son will be Somasarmman; his son will 
be Sasadharman and his successor will be Vrihadratha. These are the ten 
Mauryas, who will reign over the earth for a hundred and thirty-seven years. 


The dynasty of the Sungas will next become possessed of the sovereignty; for 
Pushpamitra, the general of the last Maurya prince, will put his master to death, 

r 

and ascend the throne his son will be Agnimitra his son will be Sujyeshtha his 
son will be Vasumitra his son will be Ardraka his son will be Pulindaka his son 
will be Ghoshavasu his son will be Vajramitra his son will be Bhagavata his son 
will be Devabhuti. These are the ten Sungas, who will govern the kingdom for a 
hundred and twelve years. 

Devabhuti, the last Sunga prince, being addicted to, immoral indulgences, his 
minister, the Kanwa named Vasudeva will murder him, and usurp the kingdom: 
his son will be Bhumimitra; his son will be Narayaria; his son will be Susarman. 
These four Kariwas will be kings of the earth for forty-five years. 

Susarman the Kanwa will be killed by a powerful servant named Sipraka, of the 
Andhra tribe, who will become king, and found the Andhrabhritya dynasty he 
will be succeeded by his brother Krishna his son will be Sri Satakarni his son 
will be Purnotsanga his son will be Satakarni (2nd) his son will be Lambodara 
his son will be Ivilaka his son will be Meghaswati his son will be Patumat his 
son will be Arishtakarman his son will be Hala his son will be Talaka his son 
will be Pravilasena his son will be Sundara, named Satakarni his son will be 
Chakora Satakarni his son will be Sivaswati his son will be Gomatiputra his son 
will be Pulimat his son will be Sivasri Satakarni his son will be Sivaskandha his 
son will be Yajnasrr his son will be Vijaya his son will be Chandrasri his son will 
be Pulomarchish. These thirty Andhrabhritya kings will reign four hundred and 
fifty-six years. 

After these, various races will reign, as seven Abhiras, ten Garddhabas, sixteen 

r r 

Sakas, eight Yavanas, fourteen Tusharas, thirteen Muridas, eleven Maunas, 
altogether seventy-nine princes, who will be sovereigns of the earth for one 
thousand three hundred and ninety years; and then eleven Pauras will be kings 
for three hundred years. When they are destroyed, the Kailakila Yavanas will be 
kings; the chief of whom will be Vindhyasakti; his son will be Puranjaya; his son 
will be Ramachandra; his son will be Adharma, from whom will be Varanga, 
Kritanandana, Sudhinandi, Nandiyasas, Sisuka, and Pravira; these will rule for a 
hundred and six years. From them will proceed thirteen sons; then three 
Bahlikas, and Pushpamitra, and Patumitra, and others, to the number of thirteen, 
will rule over Mekala. There will be nine kings in the seven Koalas, and there 
will be as many Naishadha princes. 



r 

In Magadha a sovereign named Viswasphatika will establish other tribes; he will 
extirpate the Kshatriya or martial race, and elevate fishermen, barbarians, and 
Brahmans, and other castes, to power. The nine Nagas will reign in Padmavati, 
Kantipuri, and Mathura; and the Guptas of Magadha along the Ganges to 
Prayaga. A prince named Devarakshita will reign, in a city on the sea shore, over 
the Kosalas, Odras, Puridras, and Tamraliptas. The Guhas will possess Kalinga, 
Mahihaka, and the mountains of Mahendra. The race of Mariidhanu will occupy 
the countries of the Nishadas, Naimishikas, and Kalatoyas. The people called 
Kanakas will possess the Amazon country, and that called Miishika. Men of the 

r r r r 

three tribes, but degraded, and Abhiras and Sudras, will occupy Saurashtra, 
Avanti, Sura, Arbuda, and Marubhumi: and Sudras, outcastes, and barbarians 
will be masters of the banks of the Indus, Darvika, the Chandrabhaga, and 
Kashmir. 

These will all be contemporary monarchs, reigning over the earth; kings of 
churlish spirit, violent temper, and ever addicted to falsehood and wickedness. 
They will inflict death on women, children, and cows; they will seize upon the 
property of their subjects; they will be of limited power, and will for the most 
part rapidly rise and fall; their lives will be short, their desires insatiable, and 
they will display but little piety. The people of the various countries 
intermingling with them will follow their example, and the barbarians being 
powerful in the patronage of the princes, whilst purer tribes are neglected, the 
people will perish. Wealth and piety will decrease day by day, until the world 
will be wholly depraved. Then property alone will confer rank; wealth will be 
the only source of devotion; passion will be the sole bond of union between the 
sexes; falsehood will be the only means of success in litigation; and women will 
be objects merely of sensual gratification. Earth will be venerated but for its 
mineral treasures the Brahmanical thread will constitute a Brahman; external 
types (as the staff and red garb) will be the only distinctions of the several orders 
of life; dishonesty will be the universal means of subsistence; weakness will be 
the cause of dependance; menace and presumption will be substituted for 
learning; liberality will be devotion; simple ablution will be purification mutual 
assent will be marriage; fine clothes will be dignity and water afar off will be 
esteemed a holy spring. Amidst all castes he who is the strongest will reign over 
a principality thus vitiated by many faults. The people, unable to bear the heavy 
burdens imposed upon them by their avaricious sovereigns, will take refuge 



amongst the valleys of the mountains, and will be glad to feed upon wild honey, 
herbs, roots, fruits, flowers, and leaves: their only covering will be the bark of 
trees, and they will be exposed to the cold, and wind, and sun, and rain. No 
man's life will exceed three and twenty years. Thus in the Kali age shall decay 
constantly proceed, until the human race approaches its annihilation. 

When the practices taught by the Vedas and the institutes of law shall nearly 
have ceased, and the close of the Kali age shall be nigh, a portion of that divine 
being who exists of his own spiritual nature in the character of Brahma, and who 
is the beginning and the end, and who comprehends all things, shall descend 
upon earth: he will be born in the family of Vishnuyasas, an eminent Brahman of 
Sambhala village, as Kalki, endowed with the eight superhuman faculties. By his 
irresistible might he will destroy all the Mlechchhas and thieves, and all whose 
minds are devoted to iniquity. He will then reestablish righteousness upon earth; 
and the minds of those who live at the end of the Kali age shall be awakened, 
and shall be as pellucid as crystal. The men who are thus changed by virtue of 
that peculiar time shall be as the seeds of human beings, and shall give birth to a 
race who shall follow the laws of the Krita age, or age of purity. As it is said; 
"When the sun and moon, and the lunar asterism Tishya, and the planet Jupiter, 
are in one mansion, the Krita age shall return." 

Thus, most excellent Muni, the kings who are past, who are present, and who are 
to be, have been enumerated. From the birth of Parikshit to the coronation of 
Nanda it is to be known that 1015 years have elapsed. When the two first stars of 
the seven Rishis (the great Bear) rise in the heavens, and some lunar asterism is 
seen at night at an equal distance between them, then the seven Rishis continue 
stationary in that conjunction for a hundred years of men. At the birth of 
Parikshit they were in Magha, and the Kali age then commenced, which consists 
of 1200 (divine) years. When the portion of Vishnu (that had been born from 
Vasudeva) returned to heaven, then the Kali age commenced. As long as the 
earth was touched by his sacred feet, the Kali age could not affect it. As soon as 
the incarnation of the eternal Vishnu had departed, the son of Dharma, 
Yudhishthira, with his brethren, abdicated the sovereignty. Observing 
unpropitious portents, consequent upon Krishna's disappearance, he placed 
Parikshit upon the throne. When the seven Rishis are in Purvashadha, then 
Nanda will begin to reign, and thenceforward the influence of the Kali will 
augment. 



The day that Krishna shall have departed from the earth will be the first of the 
Kali age, the duration of which you shall hear; it will continue for 360,000 years 
of mortals. After twelve hundred divine years shall have elapsed, the Krita age 
shall be renewed. 

Thus age after age Brahmans, Kshatriyas, Vaisyas, and Sudras, excellent 
Brahman, men of great souls, have passed away by thousands; whose names and 
tribes and families I have not enumerated to you, from their great number, and 
the repetition of appellations it would involve. Two persons, Devapi of the race 
of Puru, and Maru of the family of Ikshwaku, through the force of devotion 
continue alive throughout the whole four ages, residing at the village of Kalapa: 
they will return hither in the beginning of the Krita age, and, becoming members 
of the family of the Manu, give origin to the Kshatriya dynasties. In this manner 
the earth is possessed through every series of the three first ages, the Krita, Treta, 
and Dwapara, by the sons of the Manu; and some remain in the Kali age, to 
serve as the rudiments of renewed generations, in the same way as Devapi and 
Maru are still in existence. 

I have now given you a summary account of the sovereigns of the earth; to 
recapitulate the whole would be impossible even in a hundred lives. These and 
other kings, who with perishable frames have possessed this ever-during world, 
and who, blinded with deceptive notions of individual occupation, have indulged 
the feeling that suggests, "This earth is mine—it is my son's—it belongs to my 
dynasty," have all passed away. So, many who reigned before them, many who 
succeeded them, and many who are yet to come, have ceased, or will cease, to 
be. Earth laughs, as if smiling with autumnal flowers, to behold her kings unable 
to effect the subjugation of themselves. I will repeat to you, Maitreya, the 
stanzas that were chanted by Earth, and which the Muni Asita communicated to 
Janaka, whose banner was virtue. "How great is the folly of princes, who are 
endowed with the faculty of reason, to cherish the confidence of ambition, when 
they themselves are but foam upon the wave. Before they have subdued 
themselves, they seek to reduce their ministers, their servants, their subjects, 
under their authority; they then endeavour to overcome their foes. 'Thus,' say 
they, 'will we conquer the ocean-circled earth;' and, intent upon their project, 
behold not death, which is not far off. But what mighty matter is the subjugation 
of the sea-girt earth to one who can subdue himself. Emancipation from 
existence is the fruit of self-control. It is through infatuation that kings desire to 



possess me, whom their predecessors have been forced to leave, whom their 
fathers have not retained. Beguiled by the selfish love of sway, fathers contend 
with sons, and brothers with brothers, for my possession. Foolishness has been 
the character of every king who has boasted, 'All this earth is mine—every thing 
is mine—it will be in my house for ever;' for he is dead. How is it possible that 
such vain desires should survive in the hearts of his descendants, who have seen 
their progenitor, absorbed by the thirst of dominion, compelled to relinquish me, 
whom he called his own, and tread the path of dissolution? When I hear a king 
sending word to another by his ambassador, 'This earth is mine; immediately 
resign your pretensions to it;' I am moved to violent laughter at first, but it soon 
subsides in pity for the infatuated fool." 

These were the verses, Maitreya, which Earth recited, and by listening to which 
ambition fades away like snow before the sun. I have now related to you the 
whole account of the descendants of the Manu; amongst whom have flourished 
kings endowed with a portion of Vishnu, engaged in the preservation of the 
earth. Whoever shall listen reverently and with faith to this narrative, proceeding 
from the posterity of Manu, shall be purified entirely from all his sins, and, with 
the perfect possession of his faculties, shall live in unequalled affluence, plenty, 
and prosperity. He who has heard of the races of the sun and moon, of 
Ikshwa.ku, Jahnu, Mandhatri, Sagara, and Raghu, who have all perished; of 
Yayati, Nahusha, and their posterity, who are no more; of kings of great might, 
resistless valour, and unbounded wealth, who have been overcome by still more 
powerful time, and are now only a tale; he will learn wisdom, and forbear to call 
either children, or wife, or house, or lands, or wealth, his own. The arduous 
penances that have been performed by heroic men obstructing fate for countless 
years, religious rites and sacrifices of great efficacy and virtue, have been made 
by time the subject only of narration. The valiant Prithu traversed the universe, 
every where triumphant over his foes; yet he was blown away, like the light 
down of the Simal tree, before the blast of time. He who was Kartaviryya 
subdued innumerable enemies, and conquered the seven zones of the earth; but 
now he is only the topic of a theme, a subject for affirmation and contradiction. 
Fie upon the empire of the sons of Raghu, who triumphed over Dasanana, and 
extended their sway to the ends of the earth; for was it not consumed in an 
instant by the frown of the destroyer? Mandhatri, the emperor of the universe, is 
embodied only in a legend; and what pious man who hears it will ever be so 
unwise as to cherish the desire of possession in his soul? Bhagiratha, Sagara, 



r 

Kakutstha, Dasanana, Rama, Lakshmana, Yudhishthira, and others, have been. Is 
it so? Have they ever really existed? Where are they now? we know not! The 
powerful kings who now are, or who will be, as I have related them to you, or 
any others who are unspecified, are all subject to the same fate, and the present 
and the future will perish and be forgotten, like their predecessors. Aware of this 
truth, a wise man will never be influenced by the principle of individual 
appropriation; and regarding them as only transient and temporal possessions, he 
will not consider children and posterity, lands and property, or whatever else is 
personal, to be his own. 




Footnotes 

1. Munika, Vayu; Pulika, Matsya; Sunaka, Bhag. 

2. For 23 years, V. and M. 

3. 24 yrs. V.; Tilaka or Balaka, 28, M. 

4. 50 yrs. V.; 53, M. 

5. Ajaka, 21 yrs. V.; Suryaka, 21, M.; Rajaka, Bhag. 

6. 20 yrs. V. and M. 

7. This number is also specified by the Vayu and Bhagavata, and the several 
years of the reigns of the former agree with the total. The particulars of the 
Matsya compose 145 years, but there is no doubt some mistake in them. 

8. Sisunaka, who according to the Vayu and Matsya relinquished Benares to 
his son, and established himself at Girivraja or Rajgriha in Behar, reigns 40 
years, V. and M. 

9. 36 yrs. V. and M. 

10. Kshemakarman, 20 yrs. V.; Kshemadharmman, 36, M. 


11. 40 yrs. V.; Kshemajit or Kshemarchis, 36, M.; Kshetrajna, Bhag. 

12. Vimbisara, 28 yrs. V.; Vindusena or Vindhyasena, 28, M.; Vidhisara, 
Bhag. 

13. 25 yrs. V.; 27, M.: but the latter inserts a Kariwayana, 9 yrs., and 
Bhumimitra or Bhumiputra, 14 yrs., before him. In this and the preceding 
name we have appellations of considerable celebrity in the traditions of the 
Bauddhas. Vidmisara, read also Vindhusara, Vilwisara, &c., is most probably 
their Vimbasara, who was born at the same time with Sakya, and was reigning 
at Rajgriha when he began his religious career. The Mahawanso says that 
Siddhatto and Bimbisaro were attached friends, as their fathers had been 
before them. Sakya is said to have died in the reign of Ajatasatru, the son of 
Vimbasara, in the eighth year of his reign. The Vayu transposes these names, 
and the Matsya still more alters the order of Ajatasatru; but the Bhagavata 
concurs with our text. The Buddhist authority differs from the Purarias 
materially as to the duration of the reigns, giving to Bimbisaro 52 years, and 
to Ajatasattu 32: the latter, according to the same, murdered his father. 
Mahawanso. We may therefore with some confidence claim for these princes 
a date of about six centuries B. C. They are considered co-temporary with 
Sudhodana, &c. in the list of the Aikshwakavas. 

14. Harshaka, 25 yrs. V.; Vansaka, 24, M. 

15. 33 yrs. V.; Udibhi or Udasin, 33, M. According to the Vayu, Udaya or 
Udayaswa founded Kusumapur or Pataliputra, on the southern angle of the 
Ganges. The legends of Sakya, consistently with this tradition, take no notice 
of this city in his peregrinations on either bank of the Ganges. The 
Mahawanso calls the son and successor of Ajatasatru, Udayibhadako 
(U dayinhhadraka) 

16. 42 and 43 yrs. V.; 40 and 43, M. The Mahawanso has in place of these, 
Anuruddhako, Mundo, and Nagadaso; all in succession parricides: the last 
deposed by an insurrection of the people. 

17. The several authorities agree in the number of ten Saisunagas, and in the 
aggregate years of their reigns, which the Matsya and the Bhagavata call 360: 
the Vayu has 362, with which the several periods correspond: the details of 


the Matsya give 363. The Vayu and Matsya call the Saisunagas, 
Kshatrabandhus, which may designate an inferior order of Kshatriyas: they 
also observe, that cotemporary with the dynasties already specified, the 
Pauravas, the Varhadrathas, and Magadhas, there were other races of royal 
descent; as, Aikshwakava princes, 24: Panchalas, 25, V.; 27, M: Kalakas or 
Kasakas or Kaseyas, 24: Haihayas, 24, V.; 28, M.: Kalingas, 32, V.; 40, M.: 
Sakas, V.; Asmakas, M., 25: Kuravas, 26: Maithilas, 28: Surasenas, 23: and 
Vitihotras, 20. 

18. The Bhagavata calls him Mahapadmapati, the lord of Mahapadma; which 
the commentator interprets, 'sovereign of an infinite host,' or 'of immense 
wealth;' Mahapadma signifying 100.000 millions. The Vayu and Matsya, 
however, consider Mahapadma as another name of Nanda. 

19. So the Bhagavata also; but it would be more compatible with chronology 
to consider the nine Nandas as so many descents. The Vayu and Matsya give 
eighty-eight years to Mahapadma, and only the remaining twelve to Sumalya 
and the rest of the remaining eight; these twelve years being occupied with the 
efforts of Kautilya to expel the Nandas. The Mahawanso, evidently intending 
the same events, gives names and circumstances differently; it may be 
doubted if with more accuracy. On the deposal of Nagadaso, the people raised 
to the throne the minister Susunago, who reigned eighteen years. This prince 
is evidently confounded with the Sisuuaga of the Puranas. He was succeeded 
by his son Kalasoko, who reigned twenty years; and he was succeeded by his 
sons, ten of whom reigned together for twenty-two years: subsequently there 
were nine, who, according to their seniority, reigned for twenty-two years. The 
Brahman Chanako put the ninth surviving brother, named Dhana-Nando 
(Rich-Nanda), to death, and installed Chandagutto. Mahawanso. These 
particulars, notwithstanding the alteration of some of the names, belong 
clearly to one story; and that of the Buddhists looks as if it was borrowed and 
modified from that of the Brahmans. The commentary on the Mahawanso, 
translated by Mr. Tumour (Introduction, p. xxxviii.), calls the sons of 
Kalasoko 'the nine Nandas;' but another Buddhist authority, the Dipawanso, 
omits Kalasoko, and says that Susunago had ten brothers, who after his 
demise reigned collectively twenty-two years. Journal of the As. Soc. of 
Bengal, Nov. 1838. 

20. For the particulars of the story here alluded to, see the Mudra Rakshasa, 


Hindu Theatre, vol. II. Kautilya is also called, according to the commentator 
on our text, Vatsyayana, Vishriugupta, and Chariakya. According to the 
Matsya P., Kantilya retained the regal authority for a century; but there is 
some inaccuracy in the copies. 

21. This is the most important name in all the lists, as it can scarcely be 
doubted that he is the Sandrocottus, or, as Athenaeus writes more correctly, the 
Sandrocoptus, of the Greeks, as I have endeavoured to prove in the 
introduction to the Mudra Rakshasa. The relative positions of Chandragupta, 
Vidmisara, or Bimbisara, and Ajatasatru, serve to confirm the identification. 
Sakya was cotemporary with both the latter, dying in the eighth year of 
Ajatasatru's reign. The Mahawanso says he reigned twenty-four years 
afterwards; but the Vayu makes his whole reign but twenty-five years, which 
would place the close of it B. C. 526. The rest of the Saisunaga dynasty, 
according to the Vayu and Matsya, reigned 143 or 140 years; bringing their 
close to B. C. 383. Another century being deducted for the duration of the 
Nandas, would place the accession of Chandragupta B. C. 283. Chandragupta 
was the cotemporary of Seleucus Nicator, who began his reign B. C. 310, and 
concluded a treaty with him B. C. 305. Although therefore his date may not be 
made out quite correctly from the Paurariik premises, yet the error cannot be 
more than twenty or thirty years. The result is much nearer the truth than that 
furnished by Buddhist authorities. According to the Mahawanso a hundred 
years had elapsed from the death of Buddha to the tenth year of the reign of 
Kalasoko. He reigned other ten years, and his sons forty-four, making a total 
of 154 years between the death of Sakya and the accession of Chandragupta, 
which is consequently placed B. C. 389, or above seventy years too early. 
According to the Buddhist authorities, Chan-ta-kutta or Chandragupta 
commenced his reign 396 B. C. Burmese Table; Prinsep's Useful Tables. Mr. 
Tumour, in his Introduction, giving to Kalasoko eighteen years subsequent to 
the century after Buddha, places Chandragupta's accession B. C. 381, which, 
he observes, is sixty years too soon; dating, however, the accession of 
Chandragupta front 323 B. C. or immediately upon Alexander's death, a 
period too early by eight or ten years at least. The discrepancy of dates, Mr. 
Tumour is disposed to think, proceeds from some intentional perversion of the 
buddhistical chronology. Introd. p. L. The commentator on our text says that 
Chandragupta was the son of Nanda by a wife named Mura, whence he and 
his descendants were called Mauryas. Col. Tod considers Maurya a corruption 


of Mori, the name of a Rajput tribe. The Tika on the Mahawanso builds a 
story on the fancied resemblance of the word to Mayura, S. Mori, Pr. 'a 
peacock.' There being abundance of pea-fowl in the place where the Sakya 
tribe built a town, they called it Mori, and there princes were thence called 
Mauryas. Tumour, Introduction to the Mahawanso, p. xxxix. Chandragupta 
reigned, according to the Vayu P., 24 years; according to the Mahawanso, 34; 
to the Dipawasanso, 24. 

22. So the Mahawanso, Bindusaro. Burmese Table, Bin-tu-sara. The Vayu has 
Bhadrasara, 25 years; the Bhagavata, Varisara. The Matsya names but four 
princes of this race, although it concurs with the others in stating the series to 
consist of ten. The names are also differently arranged, and one is peculiar: 
they are, Satadhanwan, Vrihadratha, Suka, and Dasaratha. 

23. Asoka, 36 years, Vayu; Suka, 26, Mats.; Asokavarddhana, Bhag.; Asoko 
and Dhammasoko, Mahawanso. This king is the most celebrated of any in the 
annals of the Buddhists. In the commencement of his reign he followed the 
Brahmanical faith, but became a convert to that of Buddha, and a zealous 
encourager of it. He is said to have maintained in his palace 64,000 Buddhist 
priests, and to have erected 84,000 columns or topes throughout India. A great 
convocation of Buddhist priests was held in the eighteenth year of his reign, 
which was followed by missions to Ceylon and other places. According to 
Buddhist chronology he ascended the throne 218 years after the death of 
Buddha, B. C. 325. As the grandson of Chandragupta, however, he must have 
been some time subsequent to this, or, agreeably to the joint duration of the 
reigns of Chandragupta and Bindusara, supposing the former to have 
commenced his reign about B. C. 315, forty-nine years later, or B. C. 266. The 
duration of his reign is said to have been thirty-six years, bringing it down to 
B. C. 230: but if we deduct these periods from the date assignable to 
Chandragupta, of B. C. 283, we shall place Asoka's reign from B. C. 234 to 
198. Now it is certain that a number of very curious inscriptions, on columns 
and rocks, by a Buddhist prince, in an ancient form of letter, and the Pali 
language, exist in India; and that some of them refer to Greek princes, who 
can be no other than members of the Seleucidan and Ptolemaean dynasties, 
and are probably Antiochus the Great and Ptolemy Euergetes, kings of Syria 
and Egypt in the latter part of the third century before Christ. Journal of the 
Asiatic Society of Bengal, February and March, 1838. The Indian king 


appears always under the appellation Piyadasi or Priyadarsin, 'the beautiful;' 
and is entitled Devanam-piya, 'the beloved of the gods.' According to 
Buddhist authorities, the Rasawahini and Dipawanso, quoted by Mr. Tumour 
(J. As. Soc. of Bengal, Dec. 1837,and Nov. 1838), Piyadasi or Piyadasano is 
identified both by name and circumstances with Asoka, and to him therefore 
the inscriptions must be attributed. Their purport agrees well enough with his 
character, and their wide diffusion with the traditionary report of the number 
of his monuments. His date is not exactly that of Antiochus the Great, but it is 
not very far different, and the corrections required to make it correspond are 
no more than the inexact manner in which both Brahmanical and Buddhist 
chronology is preserved may well be expected to render necessary. 

24. The name of Dasaratha, in a similar ancient character as that of Piyadasi's 
inscriptions, has been found at Gaya amongst Buddhist remains, and like them 
decyphered by Mr. Prinsep, Journ. As. Soc. Bengal, Aug. 1837. A different 
series of names occurs in the Vayu; or, Kusala, 8 yrs.; Bandhupalita, 
Indrapalita, Dasavarman, 7 yrs.; Satadhara, 8 yrs.; and Vrihadaswa, 7 yrs. The 
Bhagavata agrees in most of the names, and its omission of Dasaratha is 
corrected by the commentator. 

25. Satadhanwan, Bhag. 

26. The Vayu says nine Sumurttyas reigned 137 years. The Matsya and 
Bhagavata have ten Mauryas, and 137 years. The detailed numbers of the 
Vayu and Matsya differ from their totals, but the copies are manifestly 
corrupt. 

471:27 The Bhagavata omits this name, but states that there were ten Sungas, 
although, without Pushpamitra, only nine are named. The Vayu and Matsya 
have the same account of the circumstances of his accession to the throne; the 
former gives him a reign of sixty, the latter of thirty-six years. In a play 
attributed to Kalidasa, the Malavikagnimitra, of which Agnimitra is the hero, 
his father is alluded to as the Senani or general, as if he had deposed his 
master in favour, not of himself, but of his son. Agnimitra is termed king of 
Vidisa, not of Magadha. Pushpamitra is represented as engaged in a conflict 
with the Yavanas on the Indus; thus continuing the political relations with the 
Greeks or Scythians of Bactria and Ariana. See Hindu Theatre, vol. I. 347. 


28. 8 yrs. V.; omitted M. 


29. 7 yrs. V. and M.; but the latter places him after Vasumitra; and in the 
drama the son of Agnimitra is called Vasumitra. 

30. 8 yrs. V.; 10 yrs. M. 

31. Andraka, V.; Antaka, M.: they agree in his reign, 2 years. Bhadraka, Bhag. 

32. 3 yrs. V. and M. 

33. 3 yrs. V.; omitted, M.; Ghosha, Bhag. 

34. 9 yrs. M. 

35. Bhaga, M.; 32 yrs. V. and M. 

36. Kshemabhumi, V.; Devabhumi, M.; 10 yrs. both. 

37. The Bhagavata says, 'more than a hundred.' The commentator explains it: 
112. The Vayu and Matsya have the same period. 

38. The names of the four princes agree in all the authorities. The Matsya 
transfers the character of Vyasani to the minister, with the further addition of 
his being a Brahman; Dwija. In the lists given by Sir Wm. Jones and Col. 
Wilford, the four Kanwas are said to have reigned 345 years; but in seven 
copies of the Vishnu P., from different parts of India, the number is, as given 
in the text, forty-five. There is however authority for the larger number, both 
in the text of the Bhagavata and the comment. The former has, #### and the 
latter, ### . There is no doubt therefore of the purport of the text; and it is only 
surprising that such a chronology should have been inserted in the Bhagavata, 
not only in opposition to all probability, but to other authority. The Vayu and 
Matsya not only confirm the lower number by stating it as a total, but by 
giving it in detail; thus: 


Vasudeva will reign 

9 years 

Bhumimitra 

14 

Narayana 

12 

















Susarman 

10 

Total 

45 


And six copies of the Matsya concur in this statement. 

39. The expressions Andhrajatiyas and Andhrabhrityas have much perplexed 
Col. Wilford, who makes three races out of one, Andhras, Andhrajatiyas, and 
Andhrabhrityas. As. Res. IX. 101. There is no warrant for three races in the 
Purarias, although the Matsya, and perhaps the Vayu, distinguishes two, as we 
shall hereafter see. Our text has but one, to which all the terms may be 
applied. The first of the dynasty was an Andhra by birth or caste (jatiya), and a 
servant (bhritya) of the last of the Kariwa race. So the Vayu; ###: the Matsya; 
### and the Bhagavata; ###. The terms 'an Andhra by caste' and 'a Bhritya or 
servant,' with the addition, in the last passage, of Vrishala, 'a Sudra,' all apply 
to one person and one dynasty. Wilford has made wild work with his triad. 
The name of the first of this race is variously read: Sindhuka, Vayu; Sisuka, 
Matsya; Balin, Bhag.; and, according to Wilford, Chhismaka in the 
Brahmanda P., and Sudraka or Suraka in the Kumarika Kharida of the Skanda 
P. As. Res. IX. 107. He reigned 23 years, Vayu and Matsya. If the latter form 
of his name be correct, he may be the king who is spoken of in the prologue to 

f 

the Mrichchhakati. 

40. 10 yrs. V.; 18, M. 

41. 56 yrs. V.; 18, M.; 10, Brahmanda, Wilford; Simalakarni, Mats.; 
Santakarria, Bhag. 

42. Omitted, V.; 18 yrs. M.; Paurnamasa, Bhag. 

43. Omitted, V. and Bhag.; 56 yrs. M.; but the latter has before him a 
Srivaswani, 18 yrs. 

44. 18 yrs. M. 

45. Apilaka, 12 yrs. V. and M.; Chivilika or Vivilika, Bhag. 


46. Omitted, V. and M. 















47. Patumavi, 24 yrs. V.; Drirhamana, Bhag. 

48. Nemi-krishria, 25 yrs. V.; Arishtakarrii, 25 yrs. M. 

49. Hala, 1 yr. V.; 5 yrs. M.; Haleya, Bhag. 

50. Mandalaka, 5 yrs. M.; omitted, Bhag. 

51. Purishasena, 21 yrs. V.; Purindrasena, 5 yrs. Mats.; Purishataru, Bhag. 

52. Satakarrii only, V. and M.; the first gives him three years, the second but 
one. Sunanda, Bhag. 

53. Chakora, 6 months, V.; Vikarrii, 6 months, M. 

54. 28 yrs. V. and M. 

55. Gotamiputra, 21 yrs. V. and M. 

56. Pulomat, 28 yrs. M.; Purimat, Bhag. 

57. Omitted, V.; 7 yrs. M.; Medhasiras, Bhag. 

58. Omitted, V.; 7 yrs. M. 

59. 29 yrs. V.; 9 yrs. M. 

60. 6 yrs. V. and M. 

61. Daridasri, 3 yrs. V.; Chandrasri, 10 yrs. M.; Chandravijaya, Bhag. 

62. Pulovapi, 7 yrs. V.; Pulomat, 7 yrs. M.; Sulomadhi, Bhag. 

63. The Vayu and Bhagavata state also 30 kings, and 456 years; the Matsya 
has 29 kings, and 460 years. The actual enumeration of the text gives but 24 
names; that of the Bhagavata but 23; that of the Vayu but 17. The Matsya has 
the whole 29 names, adding several to the list of our text; and the aggregate of 
the reigns amounts to 435 years and 6 months. The difference between this 
and the total specified arises probably from some inaccuracy in the MSS. As 
this list appears to be fuller than any other, it may be advisable to insert it as it 


occurs in the Radcliffe copy of the Matsya P. 


1. 

Sisuka 

23 

yrs. 

2. 

Krishna 

18 


3. 

Simalakarni 

18 


4. 

Purnotsanga 

18 


5. 

Srivaswani 

18 


6. 

Satakarni 

56 


7. 

Lambodara 

18 


8. 

Apitaka 

12 


9. 

Sangha 

18 


10. 

Satakarni 

18 


11. 

Skandhaswati 

7 


12. 

Mrigendra 

3 


13. 

Kuntalaswati 

28 


14. 

Swatikarna 

1 


15. 

Pulomavit 

36 


16. 

Gorakshaswasri 

25 


17. 

Hala 

5 


18. 

Mantalaka 

5 


19. 

Purindrasena 

5 


20. 

Rajadaswati 

0 

6 months 

21. 

Sivaswati 

28 


22. 

Gautamiputra 

21 


23. 

Pulomat 

28 


24. 

Sivasri 

7 


25. 

Skandhaswati 

7 


26. 

Yajnasri 

9 


27. 

Vijaya 

6 


28. 

Vadasri 

10 









































































29. 

Pulomat 

7 



Total 

435 

yrs. 6 m. 


Several of the names vary in this list from those in my copy. The adjuncts 
Swati and Satikarria appear to be conjoined or not with the other appellations, 
according to the convenience of, the metre, and seem to be the family 
designations or titles. The dynasty is of considerable chronological interest, as 
it admits of some plausible verifications. That a powerful race of Andhra 
princes ruled in India in the beginning of the Christian era, we learn from 
Pliny, who describes them as possessed of thirty fortified cities, with an army 
of 100,000 men and 1000 elephants. The Andrae of this writer are probably the 
people of the upper part of the peninsula, Andhra being the proper designation 
of Telingana. The Peutingerian tables, however, place the Andre-Indi on the 
banks of the Ganges, and the southern princes may have extended or shifted 
the site of their power. Towards the close of the dynasty we find names that 
appear to agree with those of princes of middle India, of whom mention is 
made by the Chinese; as, Yue-gnai (Yajnasri), king of Kiapili, A. D. 408; Des 
Guignes, I. 45; and Ho-lo-mien (Puloman), king of Magadha in 621; ibid. I. 
56. The Paurariik lists place these two princes more nearly together, but we 
cannot rely implicitly upon their accuracy. Calculating from Chandragupta 
downwards, the Indian date of Yajna and the Chinese Yue-gnai corresponds; 
for we have, 


10 

Mauryas 

137 

yrs. 

10 

Sungas 

112 


4 

Kariwas 

45 


27 

Andhras 

437 




731 



Deduct for Chandragupta's date 

312 

B. C. 



419 

A. C. 


A date remarkably near that derivable from the Chinese annals. If the Indian 








































Puloman be the same with the Chinese Ho-lo-mien, there must be some 
considerable omission in the Paurariik dynasty. There is a farther identification 
in the case of Ho-lo-mien, which makes it certain that a prince of Magadha is 
intended, as the place of his residence is called by the Chinese Kia-so-mo- 

r 

pulo-ching and Potoli-tse-Ching; or in Sanscrit, Kusuma-pura and Patali- 
putra. The equivalent of the latter name consists, not only in the identity of the 

r 

sounds Patali and Po-to-li, but in the translation of 'putra' by 'tse;' each word 
meaning in their respective languages 'son.' No doubt can be entertained 

r 

therefore that the city intended is the metropolis of Magadha, Pataliputra or 
Palibothra. Wilford identifies Pulomat or Puloman with the Po-lo-muen of the 
Chinese; but Des Guignes interprets Po-lo-muen kue, 'royaume des 
Brahmanes.' Buchanan (Hamilton), following the Bhagavata as to the name of 
the last king, Sulomadhi, would place him about A. D. 846; but his premises 
are far from accurate, and his deduction in this instance at least is of no 
weight. Geneal. of the Hindus, Introd. He supposes the Andhra kings of 
Magadha to have retained their power on the Ganges until the Mohammedan 
invasion, or the twelfth century, when they retired to the south, and reigned at 
Warankal in Telingana. Inscriptions and coins, however, confirm the statement 
of the Purarias, that a different dynasty succeeded to the Andhras some 
centuries before the Mohammedan conquests; and the Chinese also record, 
that upon the death of the king of Magadha, Ho-lo-mien (Puloman?), some 
time before A. D. 648, great troubles in India took place. Des Guignes. Some 
very curious and authentic testimony to the actual existence of these Andhra 
kings has been lately afforded by the discovery of an ancient inscription in 

r 

Guzerat, in which Rudra Dama, the Kshatrapa or Satrap of Surashtra, is 
recorded to have repeatedly overcome Satakarrii, king of the southern country 
(Dakshiriapatha). The inscription is without date, but it is in an old character, 
and makes mention of the two Maurya princes, Chandragupta and Asoka, as if 
not very long prior to its composition. Mr. J. Prinsep, to whom we are 
indebted for the decyphering and translating of this important document, has 
been also successful in decyphering the legends on a series of coins belonging 
to the princes of Surashtra, amongst whom the name of Rudra Dama occurs; 
and he is inclined, although with hesitation, to place these princes about a 
century after Anoka, or Rudra Dama about 153 B. C. J. As. Soc. Bengal, May 
1837, and April 1838. According to the computation hazarded above from our 
text, the race of Andhra kings should not commence till about 20 years B. C., 
which would agree with Pliny's notice of them; but it is possible that they 


existed earlier in the south of India, although they established their authority 
in Magadha only in the first centuries of the Christian era. 

64. These parallel dynasties are thus particularized in our other authorities: 

Abhiras, 7, M.; 10, V; kings of Avabhriti, 7, Bhag. 

Garddabhins, 10, M. V. Bhag. 

Sakas, 18, M. V.; Kankas, 16, Bhag. 

Yavanas, 8, M. V. Bhag. 

Tusharas, 14, M. V.; Tushkaras, 14, Bhag. 

Marundas, 13, V.; Purundas, 13, M.; Sururidas, 10, Bhag. 

Maunas, 18, V.; Hunas, 19, M.; Maulas, 11, Bhag. 

Total—85 kings, Vayu; 89, Matsya; 76, and 1399 years, Bhag. 

The other two authorities give the years of each dynasty severally. The 
numbers are apparently intended to be the same, but those of the Matsya are 
palpable blunders, although almost all the MSS. agree in the reading. The 
chronology of the Vayu is, Abhiras, 67 years; Garddabhins, 72; Sakas, 380; 
Yavanas, 82; Tusharas, 500 (all the copies of the Matsya have 7000); 
Marundas, 200; and Mlechchhas, intending perhaps Maunas, 300 yrs. Total 
1601 years, or less than 19 years to a reign. They are not however continuous, 
but nearly cotemporary dynasties; and if they comprise, as they probably do, 
the Greek and Scythian princes of the west of India, the periods may not be 
very wide of the truth. The Matsya begins the list with one more dynasty, 
another Andhra (see n. 39), of whom there were seven: 'When the dominion of 
the Andhras has ceased, there shall be seven other Andhras, kings of the race 
of their servants; and then nine Abhiras.' The passage of the Vayu, although 
somewhat similar in terms, has a different purport: 'Of these, the Andhras 
having passed away, there shall be seven cotemporary races; as, ten Abhiras,' 
&c. The passage is differently read in different copies, but this is the only 
intelligible reading. At the same time it subsequently specifies a period for the 
duration of the Andhra dynasty different from that before given, or three 


hundred years, as if a different race was referred to: 'The Andhras shall 
possess the earth two hundred years and one hundred.' The Matsya has twice 
five hundred: 'The Sriparvatiya Andhras twice five hundred years.' One MS. 
has more consistently fifty-two years. But there is evidently something faulty 
in all the MSS. The expression of the Matsya, 'Sriparvatiya Andhras,' is 
remarkable; Sriparvat being in Telingana. There is probably some confusion 
of the two races, the Magadha and Tailinga kings, in these passages of the 
Purarias. The Bhagavata has a dynasty of seven Andhra kings, but of a 
different period (see n. 39). Col. Wilford has attempted a verification of these 
dynasties; in some instances perhaps with success, though certainly not in all. 
The Abhiras he calls the shepherd kings of the north of India: they were more 
probably Greeks or Scythians or Parthians, along the lower Indus: traces of 
the name occur, as formerly observed, in the Abiria of Ptolemy, and the Ahirs 
as a distinct race still exist in Guzerat. Araish Mehfil. The Sakas are the Sacae, 
and the duration of their power is not unlikely to be near the truth. The eight 
Yavana kings may be, as he supposes, Greek princes of Bactria, or rather of 
western India. The Tusharas he makes the Parthians. If the Bhagavata has the 
preferable reading, Tushkaras, they were the Tochari, a Scythian race. The 
Mururidas, or, as he has it, Maururidas, he considers to be a tribe of Huns, the 
Morundae of Ptolemy. According to the Matsya they were of Mlechchha 
origin, Mlechchha-sambhava. The Vayu calls them Arya-mlechchhas; quere, 
Barbarians of Ariana. Wilford regards the Maunas as also a tribe of Huns; and 
the word is in all the MSS. of the Matsya, Hurias; traces of whom may be still 
found in the west and south of India. Inscription at Merritch. Journ. R. As. vol. 
III. The Garddabhins Wilford conjectures to be descendants of Bahram Gor, 
king of Persia; but this is very questionable. That they were a tribe in the west 
of India may be conjectured, as some strange tales prevail there of a 
Gandharba, changed to an ass, marrying the daughter of the king of Dhar. As. 
Res. VI. 35, and IX. 147; also 'Cutch' by Mrs. Postans, fables suggested no 
doubt by the name Garddabha, signifying an ass. There is also evidently some 
affinity between these Garddabhins and the old Gadhia Pysa, or ass-money, as 
vulgarly termed, found in various parts of western India, and which is 
unquestionably of ancient date. Journ. As. Soc. Bengal, Dec. 1835 . It may be 
the coinage of the Garddabha princes; Garddabla, being the original of Gadha, 
meaning also an ass. I have elsewhere conjectured the possibility of their 
being current about a century and a half before our era. Journ. R. As. Soc. vol. 
III. 385. Col. Tod, quoting a parallel passage in Hindi, reads, instead of 


Garddhabhin, Gor-ind, which he explains the Indras or lords of Gor; but the 
reading is undoubtedly erroneous. 

65. The copies agree in reading Pauras, but the commentator remarks that it is 
sometimes Maunas, but they have already been specified; unless the term be 
repeated in order to separate the duration of this dynasty from that of the rest. 
Such seems to be the purport of the similar passage of the Bhagavata. These 
kings (Andhras, &c.) will possess the earth 1099 years, and the eleven Maulas 
300.' No such name as Pauras occurs in the other authorities. The analogy of 
duration identifies them with the Mlechchhas of the Vayu: 'Eleven 
Mlechchhas will possess the earth for three centuries:' and the Vayu may refer 
to the Maunas, as no other period is assigned for them. The periods of the 
Bhagavata, 1099 and 300, come much to the same as that of our text, 1390; 
the one including the three centuries of the Maunas, the other stating it 
separately. The Vayu apparently adds it to the rest, thus making the total 1601, 
instead of 1390. It is evident that the same scheme is intended by the several 
authorities, although some inaccuracy affects either the original statement or 
the existing manuscripts. 

66. Kilakila, Kolakila, Kolikila, Kilinakila, as it is variously read. Sir Wm. 
Jones's Pandit stated that he understood it to be a city in the Mahratta country 
(As. Res. XI. 142); and there has been found a confirmation of his belief in an 
inscription, where Kilagila, as it is there termed, is called the capital of 
Marasinha Deva, king of the Konkan. Journ. R. As. Soc. vol. IV. This 
inscription dates A. D. 1058. The Puranas refer probably to a long antecedent 
date, when the Greek princes, or their Indo-Scythic successors, following the 
course of the Indus, spread to the upper part of the western coast of the 
peninsula. The text calls them Yavanas; and the Vayu and Matsya say they 
were Yavanas in institutions, manners, and policy. The Bhagavata names five 
of their princes, Bhutananda, Bangiri, Sisunandi, Yasnandi, and Pravira, who 
will reign 106 years, and they are therefore imperfect representatives of the 
series in our text. The Matsya has no farther specific enumeration of any 
dynasty. The Vayu makes Pravira the son of Vindhyasakti; the latter reigning 
96 years, and the former 60: the latter is king of Kanchana puri, 'the golden 
city,' and is followed by four sons, whose names are not mentioned. Between 
Vindhyasakti and Pravira, however, a dynasty of kings is introduced, some of 
the names of which resemble those of the Kilakila princes of the text. They 


are, Bhogin the son of Seshanaga, Sadachandra, Nakhavat, Dhanadhamita, 
Vinsaja, Bhutinanda—at a period before the end of the Sungas? (the copies 
have ###)—Madhunandi, his younger brother Nandiyasas; and in his race there 
will be three other Rajas, Dauhitra, Sisuka, and Ripukayan. These are called 
princes of Vidisa or Videsa; the latter meaning perhaps 'foreign,' and constitute 
the Naga dynasty. Our text calls Vindhyasakti a Murddhabhishikta, a warrior 
of a mixed race, sprung from a Brahman father and Kshatriya mother. 

67. The text of this passage runs thus: ###. 'Their sons,' the commentator 
explains by 'thirteen sons of Vindhyasakti and the rest.' The Bhagavata has a 
different statement, identifying the sons of the Vindhya race with the Bahlikas, 
and making them thirteen: 'The Bahlikas will be their thirteen sons.' As the 
commentator; 'There will be severally thirteen sons, called Bahlikas, of 
Bhutananda and the rest.' The following verse 'Pushpamitra, a king, and then 
Durmitra:' who or what they were does not appear. The commentator says, 
Pushpamitra was another king, and Durmitra was his son. Here is evidently 
careless and inaccurate compilation. The Vayu, though not quite satisfactory, 
accords better with our text. 'Pravira,' it says, will have four sons: when the 
Vindhya race is extinct, there will be three Bahlika kings, Supratika, Nabhira, 
who will reign thirty years, and Sakyamanabhava (quere this name), king of 
the Mahishas. The Pushpamitras will then be, and the Patumitras also, who 
will be seven kings of Mekala. Such is the generation.' The plural verb with 
only two Bahlika names indicates some omission, unless we correct it to it 
'they two will reign;' but the following name and title, Sakyamanabhava, king 
of the Mahishas, seems to have little connexion with the Bahlikas. If, in a 
subsequent part of the citation, the reading 'trayodasa' be correct, it must then 
be thirteen Patumitras; but it will be difficult to know what to do with Sapta, 
'seven' If for Santati we might read Saptati, 'seventy,' the sense might be, 'these 
thirteen kings ruled for seventy-seven years.' However this may be, it seems 
most correct to separate the thirteen sons or families of the Vindhya princes 
from the three Bahlikas, and them from the Pushpamitras and Patumitras, who 
governed Mekala, a country on the Narbada. What the Bahlikas, or princes of 
Balkh, had to do in this part of India is doubtful. The Durmitra of the 
Bhagavata has been conjectured by Col. Tod (Trans. R. As. Soc. I. 325) to be 
intended for the Bactrian prince Demetrius: but it is not clear that even the 
Bhagavata considers this prince as one of the Bahlikas, and the name occurs 
nowhere else. 



68. For the situation of Kosala. The three copies of the Vayu read Komala, 
and call the kings, the Meghas, more strong than sapient. The Bhagavata 
agrees with our text. The Vayu says of the Naishadhas, or kings of Nishadha, 
that they were all of the race of Nala. The Bhagavata adds two other races, 
seven Andhras (see note 63) and kings of Vaidura, with the remark that these 
were all cotemporaries, being, as the commentator observes, petty or 
provincial rulers. 

69. The Vayu has Viswasphani and Viswasphini; the Bhagavata, 
Viswasphurtti, or in some MSS. Viswaphuiji. The castes he establishes or 
places in authority, to the exclusion of the Kshatriyas, are called in all the 
copies of our text Kaivarttas, Patus, Pulindas, and Brahmans. The Vayu (three 
MSS.) has Kaivarttas, Panchakas, Pulindas, and Brahmans. The Bhagavata 
has, Pulindas, Yadus, and Madrakas. The Vayu describes Viswasphani as a 
great warrior, and apparently as a eunuch: He worshipped the gods and manes, 
and dying on the banks of the Ganges went to the heaven of Indra. 

70. Such appears to be the purport of our text. The nine Nagas might be 
thought to mean the same as the descendants of Sesha Naga, but the Vayu has 
another series here, analogous to that of the text: 'The nine Naka kings will 
possess the city Champavati, and the seven Nagas (?) the pleasant city 
Mathura. Princes of the Gupta race will possess all these countries, the banks 
of the Ganges to Prayaga and Saketa and Magadha.' This account is the most 
explicit, and probably most accurate, of all. The Nakas were Rajas of 
Bhagalpur; the Nagas, of Mathura; and the intermediate countries along the 
Ganges were governed by the Guptas, or Rajas of the Vaisya caste. The 
Bhagavata seems to have taken great liberties with the account, as it makes 
Viswasphurtti king over Anuganga, the course of the Ganges from Haridwar, 
according to the commentator, to Prayaga, residing at Padmavati: omitting the 
Nagas altogether, and converting 'gupta' into an epithet of 'medini,' the 
preserved or protected earth. Wilford considers the Nagas, Nakas, and Guptas 
to be all the same: he says, 'Then came a dynasty of nine kings, called the nine 
Nagas or Nagas; these were an obscure tribe, called for that reason 
Guptavansas, who ruled in Padmavati.' That city he calls Patna; but in the 
Malati and Madhava, Padmavati lies amongst the Vindhya hills. Kantipuri he 
makes Cotwal, near Gwalior. The reading of the Vayu, Champavati, however, 
obviates the necessity of all vague conjecture. According to Wilford there is a 


powerful tribe still called Nakas between the Jamuna and the Betwa. Of the 
existence and power of the Guptas, however, we have recently had ample 
proofs from inscriptions and coins, as in the Chandragupta and Samudragupta 
of the Allatabad column; Journ. As. Soc. Bengal, March and June, 1834; and 
Kumaragupta, Chandragupta, Samudragupta, Sasigupta, &c. on the Archer 
coins, found at Kanoj and elsewhere; As. Res. XVII. pi. 1. fig. 5, 7, 13, 19; 
and Journ. As. Soc. Bengal, Nov. 1835, pi. 38 and 39; and in other numbers of 
the same Journal: in all which, the character in which the legends are written 
is of a period prior to the use of the modern Devanagari, and was current in all 
probability about the fifth century of our era, as conjectured by Mr. Prinsep: 
see his table of the modifications of the Sanscrit alphabet from 543 B. C. to 
1200 A. D. Journ. As. Soc. Bengal, March 1838. 

71. The Vayu also mentions the descendants of Devarakshita or 
Daivarakshitas as kings of the Kosalas, Tamralipta, and the sea coast; so far 
conforming with our text as to include the western parts of Bengal, Tamlook, 
Medinipur, and Orissa. One copy reads Andhra, perhaps for Odra, Orissa; and 
one has Champa for the capital, which is probably an error, although the two 
other MSS., being still more faulty, do not offer the means of correction. 

72. The Vayu has the same. The countries are parts of Orissa and Berar. 

73. The Vayu has sons of Mariidhariya for the ruling dynasty, but names the 
countries those of the Naishadhas, Yudakas, Sasikas, and Kalatoyas. The first 
name applies to a tract of country near the Vindhya mountains, but the last to a 
country in the north. The west or southwest, however, is probably intended in 
this place. 

74. The Stri Rajya is usually placed in Bhote. It may perhaps here designate 
Malabar, where polyandry equally prevails. Mushika, or the country of 
thieves, was the pirate coast of the Konkan. The Vayu reads Bhokshyaka or 
Bhokhyaka for Mushika. The Bhagavata omits all these specifications 
subsequent to the notice of Viwasphurtti. 

75. From this we might infer that the Vishnu P. was compiled when the 
Mohammedans were making their first encroachments on the west. They seem 
to have invaded and to have settled in Sindh early in the eighth century, 
although Indian princes continued on the Indus for a subsequent period. 


Scriptor. Arab, de rebus Indicis. Gildemeister. They were engaged in 
hostilities in 698 or 700 with the prince of Kabul, in whose name, however 
disguised by its Mohammedan representations of Ratil, Ratbal, or Ratibal, it is 
not difficult to recognise the genuine Hindu appellation of Ratanpal, or 
Ratnapal. Their progress in this direction has not been traced; but at the period 
of their invasion of Sindh they advanced to Multan, and probably established 
themselves there and at Lahore within a century. Kashmir they did not occupy 
till a much later date, and the Raja Tarangini takes no notice of any attacks 
upon it; but the Chinese have recorded an application from the king of 
Kashmir, Chin-tho-lo-pi-li, evidently the Chandrapida of the Sanscrit, for aid 
against the Arabs, about A. D. 713. Gildemeister. Although, therefore, not 
actually settled at the Panjab so early as the beginning, they had commenced 
their incursions, and had no doubt made good their footing by the end of the 
eighth or commencement of the ninth century. This age of the Puraria is 
compatible with reference to the cotemporary race of Gupta kings, from the 
fourth or fifth to the seventh or eighth century; or, if we are disposed to go 
farther back, we may apply the passage to the Greek and Indo-Scythian 
princes. It seems more likely to be the former period; but in all such passages 
in this or other Purarias there is the risk that verses inspired by the presence of 
Mohammedan mlers may have been interpolated into the original text. Had 
the Mohammedans of Hindustan, however, been intended by the latter, the 
indications would have been more distinct, and the localities assigned to them 
more central. Even the Bhagavata, the date of which we have good reason for 
conjecturing to be the middle of the twelfth century, and which influenced the 
form assumed about that time by the worship of Vishnu, cannot be thought to 
refer to the Mohammedan conquerors of upper India. It is there stated, that 

r r 

rulers fallen from their castes, or Sudras, will be the princes of Saurashtra, 
Avanti, Abhira, Sura, Arbuda, and Malava; and barbarians, Sudras, and other 
outcastes, not enlightened by the Vedas, will possess Kashmir, Kaunti, and the 
banks of the Chandrabhaga and Indus.' Now it was not until the fourteenth and 
fifteenth centuries that the Mohammedans established themselves in Guzerat 
and Malwa, and the Bhagavata was unquestionably well known in various 
parts of India long before that time. (Account of Hindu Sects, As. Res. vol. 
XVI.) It cannot therefore allude to Mohammedans. By specifying the princes 
as seceders from the Vedas, there is no doubt that the barbarians and outcastes 
intended are so only in a religious sense; and we know from indisputable 
authorities that the western countries, Guzerat, Abu, Malava, were the chief 


seats, first of the Buddhists, and then of the Jainas, from a period commencing 
perhaps before the Christian era, and scarcely terminating with the 
Mohammedan conquest. Inscriptions from Abu, As. Res. vol. XVI. 

76. The commentator, having no doubt the existing state of things in view, 
interprets the passage somewhat differently: the original is, ###. The comment 
explains 'strong', and adds, the Mlechchhas will be in the centre, and the 
Aryyas at the end:' meaning, if any thing, that the unbelievers are in the heart 
of the country, and the Hindus on the borders: a description, however, never 
correct, except as applicable to the governments; and in that case inconsistent 
with the text, which had previously represented the bordering countries in the 
hands of outcastes and heretics. All that the text intends, is to represent 
infidels and foreigners high in power, and the Brahmans depressed. It is not 
unlikely that the reading is erroneous, notwithstanding the copies concur, and 
that the passage should be here the same as that of the Vayu; 'Intermixed with 
them, the nations, adopting every where barbaric institutions, exist in a state 
of disorder, and the subjects shall be destroyed.' The expression 
Mlechchhacharascha being used instead of Mlechchhascharyascha. A passage 
similar to that of the text, noticing the intermixture of Hindus and barbarians, 
occurs in a different place and designates tare condition of India in all ages: at 
no period has the whole of the population followed Brahmanical Hinduism. 

77. That is, there will be no Tirthas, places held sacred, and objects of 
pilgrimage; no particular spot of earth will have any especial sanctity. 

78. Gifts will be made from the impulse of ordinary feeling, not in connexion 
with religious rites, and as an act of devotion; and ablution will be performed 
for pleasure or comfort, not religiously with prescribed ceremonies and 
prayers. 

79. The expression Sadvesadharin is explained to mean either one who wears 
fine clothes, or who assumes the exterior garb of sanctity. Either interpretation 
is equally allowable. 

80. The Bhagavata agrees with the text in these particulars. The chief star of 
Tishya is 6 in the constellation Cancer. 

81. All the copies concur in this reading. Three copies of the Vayu assign to 



the same interval 1050 years: and of the Matsya five copies have the same, or 
1050 years; whilst one copy has 1500 years. The Bhagavata has 1115 years; 
which the commentator explains, 'a thousand years and a hundred with fifteen 
over.' He notices nevertheless, although he does not attempt to account for the 
discrepancy, that the total period from Parikshit to Nanda was actually, 
according to the duration of the different intermediate dynasties, as 
enumerated by all the authorities, fifteen centuries; viz. 


Magadha kings 

1000 

yrs. 

Pradyota, &c. 

138 


Sisunaga, &c. 

362 



1500 



The shorter period is best proportioned to the number of kings; for reckoning 
from Sahadeva, who was cotemporary with Parikshit, and taking the number 
of the Varhadrathas from the Matsya, we have thirty-two of them, five of the 
Pradyota race, and ten Saisunagas, or in all forty-seven; which, as the divisor 
of 1050, gives rather more than twenty-two years to a reign. The Vayu and the 
Matsya further specify the interval from Nanda to Pulomat, the last of the 
Andhra kings, as being 836 years; a total that does not agree exactly with the 
items previously specified: 


9 

Nandas 

100 

yrs. 

10 

Mauryas 

137 


10 

Sungas 

112 


4 

Kariwas 

45 


29 

Andhras 

460 


62 


854 



In either case the average duration of reign is not improbable, as the highest 
number gives less than fourteen years to each prince. It is important to 
remember that the reign of Parikshit is, according to Hindu chronology, coeval 
with the commencement of the Kali age; and even therefore taking the longest 
Pauranik interval we have but sixteen centuries between Chandragupta—or 
considering him as the same with Sandrocoptos, nineteen centuries B. C.—for 






































the beginning of the Kali age. According to the chronology of our text, 
however, it would be but B. C. 1415; to that of the Vayu and Matsya, B. C. 
1450; and to that of the Bhagavata, 1515. According to Col. Wilford's 
computations (As. Res. vol. IX. Chron. Table) the conclusion of the great war 
took place B. C. 1370: Buchanan conjectures it to have occurred in the 
thirteenth century B. C. Vyasa was the putative father of Pandu and 

r 

Dhritarashtra, and consequently was cotemporary with the heroes of the great 
war. Mr. Colebrooke infers from astronomical data that the arrangement of the 
Vedas attributed to Vyasa took place in the fourteenth century B.C. Mr. 

r r 

Bentley brings the date of Yudhishthira, the chief of the Pandavas, to 575 B. 
C. (Historical View of Hindu Astronomy); but the weight of authority is in 
favour of the thirteenth or fourteenth century B. C. for the war of the 
Mahabharata, and the reputed commencement of the Kali age. 

82. A similar explanation is given in the Bhagavata, Vayu, and Matsya 
Puranas; and like accounts from astronomical writers are cited by Mr. 
Colebrooke, As. Res. vol. IX. The commentator on the Bhagavata thus 
explains the notion: "The two stars (Pulaha and Kratu) must rise or be visible 
before the rest, and whichever asterism is in a line south from the middle of 
those stars, is that with which the seven stars are united; and so they continue 
for one hundred years." Col. Wilford has also given a like explanation of the 
revolution of the Rishis; As. Res. vol. IX. According to Bentley the notion 
originated in a contrivance of the astronomers to shew the quantity of the 
precession of the equinoxes. This was by assuming an imaginary line or great 
circle passing through the poles of the ecliptic and the beginning of the fixed 
Magha, which circle was supposed to cut some of the stars in the Great Bear. 
The seven stars in the Great Bear the circle so assumed was called the line of 
the Rishis, and being fixed to the beginning of the lunar asterism Magha, the 
precession would be solved by stating the degree &c. of any moveable lunar 
mansion cut by that fixed line or circle as an index. Historical View of Hindu 
Astronomy. 

83. The Bhagavata has the same; and this agrees with the period assigned for 
the interval between Parikshit and Nanda of 1050 years; as, including Magha, 
we have ten asterisms to Purvashadha, or 1000 years. The Vayu and Matsya 
are so very inaccurate in all the copies consulted, that it is not safe to affirm 
what they mean to describe. Apparently they state that at the end of the 


Andhra dynasty the Rishis will be in Krittika, which furnishes other ten 
asterisms; the whole being nearly in accordance with the chronology of the 
text, as the total interval from Parikshit to the last of the Andhras is 1050 + 
836 =1886, and the entire century of each asterism at the beginning and end of 
the series need not be taken into account. The copies of the Matsya read, 'The 
seven Rishis are on a line with the brilliant Agni;' that is, with Krittika, of 
which Agni is the presiding deity. The Vayu intends in all probability the same 
phrase, but the three copies have, ### a very unintelligible clause. Again, it 
seems as if they intended to designate the end of the Andhra race as the period 
of a complete revolution, or 2700 years; for the Vayu has, 'The races at the 
end of the Andhas will be after 2700 years:' the Matsya has, ### and at the 
close of the passage, after specifying as usual that 'the seven Rishis were in 
Magha in the time of Parikshit,' the Vayu adds, ### a passage which, though 
repeated in the MSS., is obviously most inaccurate; although it might perhaps 
be understood to intimate that the Rishis will be in the twenty-fourth asterism 
after the Andhra race; but that would give only 1400 years from Parikshit to 
Pulomat; whilst if the twenty-fourth from Magha was intended, it would give 
2400 years: both periods being incompatible with previous specifications. The 
Matsya has a different reading of the second line, but one not much more 
satisfactory; 'A hundred years of Brahma will be in the twenty-fourth 
(asterism?).' In neither of these authorities, however, is it proposed by the last- 
cited passages to illustrate the chronology of princes or dynasties: the 
specification of the period, whatever it may be, is that of the era at which the 
evil influence of the Kali age is to become most active and irresistible. 

84. The Bhagavata has the same. Devapi, as the commentator observes, being 
the restorer of the lunar, and Maru of the solar race. 

85. To be the cause of Sankalpa, 'conviction,' 'belief;' and Vikalpa, 'doubt,' 
'disbelief.' The Bhagavata indulges in a similar strain, and often in the same 
words. The whole recalls the words of the Roman satirist; 

... I, demens, et saevas curre per Alpes, 

Ut pueris placeas, et declamatio fias. 







The Vishnu Purana-Book 5 


01. Chapter 
02. Chapter 
03. Chapter 
04. Chapter 
05. Chapter 
06. Chapter 
07. Chapter 
08. Chapter 
09. Chapter 

10. Chapter 

11. Chapter 

12. Chapter 

13. Chapter 

14. Chapter 

15. Chapter 

16. Chapter 

17. Chapter 

18. Chapter 

19. Chapter 

20. Chapter 

21. Chapter 

22. Chapter 

23. Chapter 

24. Chapter 

25. Chapter 

26. Chapter 

27. Chapter 

28. Chapter 

29. Chapter 

30. Chapter 

31. Chapter 

32. Chapter 

33. Chapter 

34. Chapter 

35. Chapter 

36. Chapter 

37. Chapter 

38. Chapter 




01. Chapter 


The death of Kansa announced. Earth, oppressed by the Daityas, applies to the 
gods. They accompany her to Vishnu, who promises to give her relief. Kansa 
imprisons Vasudeva and Devaki. Vishnu's instructions to Yoganidra. 

MAITREYA.—You have related to me a full account of all the different dynasties 
of kings, and of their successive transactions. I wish now to hear a more 
particular description, holy Rishi, of the portion of Vishnu that came down upon 
earth, and was born in the family of Yadu. Tell me also what actions he 
performed in his descent, as a part of a part of the supreme, upon the earth. 

PARASARA.—I will relate to you, Maitreya, the account which you have 
requested; the birth of a part of a part of Vishnu, and the benefits which his 
actions conferred upon the world. 

Vasudeva formerly married the daughter of Devaka, the illustrious Devaki, a 
maiden of celestial beauty. After their nuptials, Kansa, the increaser of the race 
of Bhoja, drove their car as their charioteer. As they were going along, a voice in 
the sky, sounding aloud and deep as thunder, addressed Kansa, and said, "Fool 
that you are, the eighth child of the damsel whom you are driving in the car shall 
take away your life!" On hearing this, Kansa drew his sword, and was about to 
put Devaki to death; but Vasudeva interposed, saying, "Kill not Devaki, great 
warrior; spare her life, and I will deliver to you every child that she may bring 
forth." Appeased by which promise, and relying on the character of Vasudeva, 
Kansa desisted from the attempt. 

At that time, Earth, overburdened by her load, repaired to mount Meru to an 
assembly of the gods, and addressing the divinities, with Brahma at their head, 
related in piteous accents all her distress. "Agni," said Earth, "is the progenitor of 
gold; Surya, of rays of light 5: the parent and guide of me and of all spheres is 
the supreme Narayaria, who is Brahma, the lord of the lord of patriarchs; the 
eldest of the eldest born; one with minutes and hours; one with time; having 
form, though indiscrete. This assemblage of yourselves, O gods, is but a part of 
him. The sun, the winds, the saints, the Rudras, the Vasus, the Aswins, fire, the 


patriarch creators of the universe, of whom Atri is the first, all are but forms of 
the mighty and inscrutable Vishnu. The Yakshas, Rakshasas, Daityas, spirits of 
evil, serpents, and children of Danu, the singers and nymphs of heaven, are 
forms of the great spirit, Vishnu. The heavens painted with planets, 
constellations, and stars; fire, water, wind, and myself, and every perceptible 
thing; the whole universe itself—consists of Vishnu. The multifarious forms of 
that manifold being encounter and succeed one another, night and day, like the 
waves of the sea. At this present season many demons, of whom Kalanemi is the 
chief, have overrun, and continually harrass, the region of mortals. The great 
Asura Kalanemi, that was killed by the powerful Vishnu, has revived in Kansa, 
the son of Ugrasena, and many other mighty demons, more than I can 

r 

enumerate, as Arishta, Dhenuka, Kesin, Pralamba, Naraka, Sunda, and the fierce 
Baria, the son of Bali, are born in the palaces of kings. Countless hosts of proud 
and powerful spirits, chiefs of the demon race, assuming celestial forms, now 
walk the earth; and, unable to support myself beneath the incumbent load, I 
come to you for succour. Illustrious deities, do you so act that I may be relieved 
from my burden, lest helpless I sink into the nethermost abyss." 

When the gods had heard these complaints of Earth, Brahma at their request 
explained to them how her burden might be lightened. "Celestials," said Brahma, 
"all that Earth has said is undoubtedly true. I, Mahadeva, and you all, are but 
Narayaria; but the impersonations of his power are for ever mutually fluctuating, 
and excess or diminution is indicated by the predominance of the strong, and the 
depression of the weak. Come therefore, let us repair to the northern coast of the 
milky sea, and having glorified Hari, report to him what we have heard. He, who 
is the spirit of all, and of whom the universe consists, constantly, for the sake of 
Earth, descends in a small portion of his essence to establish righteousness 
below." Accordingly Brahma, attended by the gods, went to the milky sea, and 
there, with minds intent upon him, praised him whose emblem is Garuda. 

"O thou," said Brahma, "who art distinct from holy writ whose double nature is 
twofold wisdom, superior and inferior, and who art the essential end of both; 
who, alike devoid and possessed of form, art the twofold Brahma smallest of the 
least, and largest of the large; all, and knowing all things; that spirit which is 
language; that spirit which is supreme; that which is Brahma, and of which 
Brahma is composed! Thou art the Rich, the Yajush, the Saman, and the 
Atharvan Vedas. Thou art accentuation, ritual, signification, metre, and 



astronomy; history, tradition, grammar, theology, logic, and law: thou who art 
inscrutable. Thou art the doctrine that investigates the distinctions between soul, 
and life, and body, and matter endowed with qualities and that doctrine is 
nothing else but thy nature inherent in and presiding over it. Thou art 
imperceptible, indescribable, inconceivable; without name, or colour, or hands, 
or feet; pure, eternal, and infinite. Thou hearest without ears, and seest without 
eyes. Thou art one and multiform. Thou movest without feet; thou seizest 
without hands. Thou knowest all, but art not by all to be known. He who beholds 
thee as the most subtile of atoms, not substantially existent, puts an end to 
ignorance; and final emancipation is the reward of that wise man whose 
understanding cherishes nothing other than thee in the form of supreme delight. 
Thou art the common centre of all, the protector of the world; and all beings 
exist in thee: all that has been, or will be, thou art. Thou art the atom of atoms; 
thou art spirit; thou only art distinct from primeval nature. Thou, as the lord of 
fire in four manifestations, givest light and fertility to Earth. Thou art the eye of 
all, and wearer of many shapes, and unobstructedly traversest the three regions 
of the universe. As fire, though one, is variously kindled, and, though 
unchangeable in its essence, is modified in many ways, so thou, lord, who art 
one omnipresent form, takest upon thee all modifications that exist. Thou art one 
supreme; thou art that supreme and eternal state which the wise behold with the 
eye of knowledge. There is nothing else but thou, O lord; nothing else has been 
or will be. Thou art both discrete and indiscrete, universal and individual, 
omniscient, all-seeing, omnipotent, possessed of all wisdom and strength and 
power. Thou art liable neither to diminution nor increase; thou art independent 
and without beginning; thou art the subjugator of all. Thou art unaffected by 
weariness, sloth, fear, anger, or desire. Thou art free from soil, supreme, 
merciful, uniform, undecaying, lord over all, the stay of all, the fountain of light, 
imperishable. To thee, uninvested by material envelopes, unexposed to sensible 
imaginings, aggregate of elemental substance, spirit supreme, be adoration. Thou 
assumest a shape, O pervader of the universe, not as the consequence of virtue or 
vice, nor from any mixture of the two, but for the sole object of maintaining 
piety in the world." 

The unborn, universal Hari, having heard with his mental ear these eulogiums, 
was pleased, and thus spake to Brahma: "Tell me, Brahma, what you and the 
gods desire: speak boldly, certain of success." Brahma, beholding the divine, 
universal form of Hari, quickly prostrated himself, and again renewed his 



praises. "Glory to thee, the thousand-formed, the thousand-armed, the many- 
visaged, many-footed; to thee, the illimitable author of creation, preservation, 
and destruction; most subtile of the subtile, most vast of the great: to thee, who 
art nature, intellect, and consciousness; and who art other spirit even than the 
spiritual root of those principles. Do thou shew favour upon us. Behold, lord, 
this earth, oppressed by mighty Asuras, and shaken to her mountain basements, 
comes to thee, who art her invincible defender, to be relieved from her burden. 
Behold me, Indra, the Aswins, Varuna, and Yama, the Rudras, the Vasus, the 
suns, the winds, fire, and all other celestials, prepared to execute whatever thou 
shalt will that we shall do. Do thou, in whom there is no imperfection, O 
sovereign of the deities, give thy orders to thy servants: lo, we are ready." 

When Brahma had ended, the supreme lord plucked off two hairs, one white and 
one black, and said to the gods, "These my hairs shall descend upon earth, and 
shall relieve her of the burden of her distress. Let all the gods also, in their own 
portions, go down to earth, and wage war with the haughty Asuras, who are 
there incorporate, and who shall every one of them be destroyed. Doubt not of 
this: they shall perish before the withering glance of mine eyes. This my (black) 
hair shall be impersonated in the eighth conception of the wife of Vasudeva, 
Devaki, who is like a goddess; and shall slay Kansa, who is the demon 
Kalanemi." Thus having spoken, Hari disappeared; and the gods bowing to him, 
though invisible, returned to the summit of mount Meru, from whence they 
descended upon earth. 

The Muni Narada informed Kansa that the supporter of the earth, Vishnu, would 
be the eighth child of Devaki; and his wrath being excited by this report, he 
placed both Vasudeva and Devaki in confinement. Agreeably to his promise, the 
former delivered to Kansa each infant as soon as it was born. It is said that these, 
to the number of six, were the children of the demon Hiranyakasipu, who were 
introduced into the womb of Devaki, at the command of Vishnu, during the 
hours of Devaki's repose, by the goddess Yoganidra, the great illusory energy of 
Vishnu, by whom, as utter ignorance, the whole world is beguiled. To her Vishnu 
said, "Go, Nidra, to the nether regions, and by my command conduct 
successively six of their princes to be conceived of Devaki. When these shall 
have been put to death by Kansa, the seventh conception shall be formed of a 
portion of Sesha, who is a part of me; and this you shall transfer, before the time 
of birth, to Rohini, another wife of Vasudeva, who resides at Gokula. The report 



shall run, that Devakl miscarries, through the anxiety of imprisonment, and 
dread of the Raja of the Bhojas. From being extracted from his mother's womb, 
the child shall be known by the name of Sankarshana, and he shall be valiant and 
strong, and like the peak of the white mountain in bulk and complexion. I will 
myself become incarnate in the eighth conception of Devaki; and you shall 
immediately take a similar character as the embryo offspring of Yasoda. In the 
night of the eighth lunation of the dark half of the month Nabhas, in the season 
of the rains, I shall be born. You shall receive birth on the ninth. Impelled and 
aided by my power, Vasudeva shall bear me to the bed of Yasoda, and you to that 
of Devaki. Kansa shall take you, and hold you up to dash you against a stone; 
but you shall escape from his grasp into the sky, where the hundred-eyed Indra 
shall meet and do homage to you, through reverence for me, and shall bow 
before you, and acknowledge you as his sister. Having slain Sumbha, Nisumbha, 
and numerous other demons, you shall sanctify the earth in many places. Thou 
art wealth, progeny, fame, patience, heaven and earth, fortitude, modesty, 
nutrition, dawn, and every other female (form or property). They who address 
thee morning and afternoon with reverence and praise, and call thee Arya, 
Durga, Vedagarbha, Ambika, Bhadra, Bhadrakali, Kshemi, or Kshemankari, 
shall receive from my bounty whatever they desire. Propitiated with offerings of 
wine and flesh and various viands, thou shalt bestow upon mankind all their 
prayers. Through my favour all men shall ever have faith in thee. Assured of 
this, go, goddess, and execute my commands." 


Footnotes 

01. The whole of this book is dedicated to the biography of Krishna. Many of 
the Puranas omit this subject altogether, or only allude to it occasionally. 
In others it is equally prominent. The Brahma P. gives the story exactly in 
the same words as our text: which has the best right to them may be 
questioned; but, as it is usually met with, the Brahma P. is a very 
heterogeneous compilation. The Hari Vansa has a narrative more detailed 
than that of the text, with additions and embellishments of its own. The 
Brahma Vaivartta throughout celebrates the acts of Krishna; and one 
portion of it, the Krishna Janma Khanda, especially describes his 


boyhood and youth. The incidents are the same in general as those in the 
text, but they are lost amidst interminable descriptions of Krishna's sports 
with the Gopis and with his mistress Radha, a person not noticed 
elsewhere; the whole is in a style indicative of a modern origin. The Agni 
R and Padma P. (Uttara Kharida) have accounts of Krishna, but they are 
mere summaries, compiled evidently from other works. The principal 
authority for the adventures of Krishna is the Bhagavata, the tenth book 
of which is exclusively devoted to him. It is this work which has, no 
doubt, mainly extended the worship of Krishna, as its popularity is 
evinced by its having been translated into all the spoken languages of 
India professing to have a literature. The Prem-sagar, its Hindi version, is 
well known; but there are also translations in Mahratta, Telugu, Tamil, 
&c. It does not seem likely, however, that the Vishnu P. has copied the 
Bhagavata; for although, its greater conciseness may sometimes look like 
abridgment, yet the descriptions are generally of a more simple and 
antiquated character. Here, as usual, the Mahabharata is no doubt the 
earliest extant authority; but it is not the earliest, for whilst it omits to 
narrate most of his personal adventures unconnected with his alliance 
with the Paridavas, it often alludes to them, and names repeatedly his 
capital, his wives, and his progeny. It also devotes a section, the Mausala 
P., to the destruction of the Yadavas. The story of Krishna the prince and 
hero must have been complete when the Mahabharata was compiled. It is 
doubtful, however, if Krishna the boy, and his adventures at Vrindavan, 
were not subsequent inventions. There are no allusions to them in the 
poem, of an unsuspicious nature. The only ones that I have met with are 
contained in a speech by Sisupala, Sabha P., vol. I. in which he reviles 
Krishna; but they may easily have been interpolated. There may be others 
scattered through the poem, but I have not observed them. 

02. The notices of Krishna's origin and character in various passages of the 
Mahabharata are by no means consistent, and indicate different dates at 
least. In an address to him by Arjuna, Vana P., vol. I. he is said to have 
passed thousands of years in various holy places, engaged in arduous 
penances. He is frequently identified with the Rishi Narayana, or he and 
Arjuna are said to be Nara and Narayana. In the Dana-dharma he is 
represented as a worshipper of Siva, and propitiating him and his wife 
Uma, and receiving as boons from them wives and children. As a warrior 
and prince he is always on the scene; but he is repeatedly called an Ansa, 


or portion of Vishnu; whilst in a great number of places he is identified 
with Vishnu or Narayaria, and is consequently 'all things.' This latter is 
his character, of course, amongst the Vaishriavas, agreeably to the text of 
the Bhagavata: 'Krishna is the lord (Vishnu) himself.' 

03. This is a still farther diminution of Krishna's dignity; he is not even a 
part, but 'a part of a part,' Ansansavatara: but this, the commentator 
maintains, is to be understood only of his form or condition as man, not 
of his power, as it suffered no diminution, either in its primary or 
secondary state, as light by suffusion suffers no decrease; and a verse of 
the Veda is cited to this effect: 'Though that which is full be taken from 
what is full, yet the remainder is undiminished;' 'Krishna is nevertheless 
the very supreme Brahma, though it be a mystery how the supreme 
should assume the form of a man.' So the Bhagavata in one passage 
predicts that the Para-purusha, Purushottama or Vishnu, will be born 
visibly in the dwelling of Vasudeva. 

04. The Bhagavata tells the circumstance as in the text. The Hari Vansa 
makes Narada apprise Kansa of his danger. Narada's interposition is not 
mentioned until afterwards by our authority. Devaki is the cousin of 
Kansa. 

05. Agni, or fire, refines gold, burns away the dross, according to the 
commentator. The sun is the lord of the rays of light; or, as the cause of 
rain and vegetation, the lord of cattle. The phrase is, ###. 

06. According to the Vayu, Kalanemi or Kayabadha was a son of Virochana, 
the grandson of Hirariyakasipu: his death is described in the Hari Vansa. 

07. These appear subsequently in the narration, and are destroyed by 
Krishna. 

08. Anamnaya; not the immediate object of the Vedas, which is devotion, not 
abstraction; ritual or worship, not knowledge. 

09. The two kinds of knowledge are termed Para, 'supreme,' and Apara, 
'other' or 'subordinate;' the first is knowledge of Para Brahma, of spirit 
abstractedly considered, perfect knowledge derived from abstraction; the 
second is knowledge of Sabda Brahma, of spirit as described and taught 
in the Vedas, or their supplementary branches. The identity of the 
supreme with both descriptions of holy knowledge pervades the whole of 
the address. 

10. Para Brahma and Sabda Brahma: see the preceding note. 

11. The doctrine alluded to may be either intended generally, or in the several 


instances, the discussion of the spiritual soul and living soul, of body 
subtile and sensible, and of matter endowed with qualities, reference may 
be purposed to the Vedanta, Yoga, and Sankhya systems. 

12. That is, as the Sabda Brahma, the supreme is identical with philosophical 
doctrines, being the object, the instigator, and the result. 

13. This is taken from the Vedas, the original of which is quoted and 
translated by Sir Win. Jones: see his Works, XIII. 368. The passage is 
thus cited by the commentator on our text: 'Without hand or foot he runs, 
he grasps; without eyes he sees; and without ears he hears: he knoweth 
all that may be known, and no one knoweth him. Him they call the first 
great spirit.' 

14. Varenya rupa, explained by Paramananda murtti; he whose form or 
impersonation is supreme felicity. 

15. Literally 'navel of all.' The passage is also read 'Thou art all and the first;' 
the cause or creator. 

16. Or the passage is understood, 'Thou art one subsequently to Prakriti;' that 
is, thou art Brahma, the active will of the supreme, creating forms from 
mdimental matter. 

17. As the three fires enjoined by the Vedas, and the fire metaphorically of 
devotion; or lightnings, solar heat, fire generated artificially, and the fire 
of digestion or animal fire; or Vishnu in that character bestows beauty, 
vigour, power, and wealth. 

18. Prita: one copy has Santa, 'calm,' 'undisturbed.' 

19. Beyond the separate layers or envelopes of elementary substances or, 
according to the Vedanta notions, uninvested by those grosser sheaths or 
coverings, derived from food and the like, by which subtile body is 
enclosed. 

20. Mahavibhuti sansthana. Vibhuti is explained by Prapancha, sensible, 
material, or elementary substance, constituting body. 

21. The passage is somewhat obscurely expressed, and is differently 
interpreted it is, 'Not from no cause, nor from cause, nor from cause and 
no cause.' The term 'no cause' may, the commentator says, designate 
fixed prescribed duties, the Nityakarma; 'cause' may signify occasional 
sacrifices, the Kamya-karma: neither of these can form any necessity for 
Vishnu's descent, as they might of a mere mortal's being born on the 
earth: or Karana is explained to mean 'obtaining pleasure,' from Ka and 
Arana, 'obtaining;' obtaining happiness, or the cause of it, piety, virtue; 


and with the negative, Akarana, the reverse, pain, the consequence of 
wickedness. The purport is clear enough; it is merely meant to state that 
Vishnu is not subject to the necessity which is the cause of human birth. 

22. The term Pradhana, which is repeated in this passage, is explained in the 
second place to mean Puman, 'soul' or 'spirit.' 

23. The same account of the origin of Krishna is given in the Mahabharata, 
Adi P., vol. I. The white hair is impersonated as Balarama; the black, as 
Krishna. The commentator on our text maintains that this is not to be 
literally understood: 'Vishnu did not intend that the two hairs should 
become incarnate, but he meant to signify, that, should he send them, 
they would be more than sufficient to destroy Kansa and his demons: or 
the birth of Rama and Krishna was a double illusion, typified by the two 
hairs.' This seems to be a refinement upon an older and somewhat 
undignified account of the origin of Krishna and his brother. The 
commentator on the Mahabharata argues that they are to be understood 
merely as the media by which Devaki and Rohini conceived. 

24. Yoganidra is the sleep of devotion or abstraction, the active principle of 
illusion, personified, and also termed Maya and Mahamaya, also Avidya 
or ignorance. In the Durga Mahatmya of the Markandeya Pur ana a she 
appears as Devi or Durga, the Sakti or bride of Siva; but in our text as 
Vaishnavi, or the Sakti of Vishnu. 

25. Allusion is here made to the exploits of Durga, as celebrated especially in 
the Durga Mahatmya; and it must be posterior to the date of that or some 
similar composition. The passage may be an interpolation, as the 
Markandeya P. in general has the appearance of being a more recent 
compilation than the Vishnu. 

26. This refers to the Pitha sthanas, 'fifty-one places,' where, according to the 
Tantras, the limbs of Sati fell, when scattered by her husband Siva, as he 
bore her dead body about, and tore it to pieces, after she had put an end 
to her existence at Daksha's sacrifice. This part of the legend seems to be 
an addition to the original fable made by the Tantras, as it is not in the 
Puranas (see the story of Daksha's sacrifice). It bears some analogy to the 
Egyptian fable of Isis and Osiris. At the Pitha sthanas, however, of 
Jwalamukhi, Vindhyavasini, Kalighat, and others, temples are erected to 
the different forms of Devi or Sati, not to the phallic emblem of 
Mahadeva, which, if present, is there as an accessory and embellishment, 
not as a principal, and the chief object of worship is a figure of the 


goddess; a circumstance in which there is an essential difference between 
the temples of Durga and shrines of Osiris. 




02. Chapter 


The conception of Devaki: her appearance: she is praised by the gods. 

THE nurse of the universe, Jagaddhatri, thus enjoined by the god of gods, 
conveyed the six several embryos into the womb of Devaki 1, and transferred the 
seventh after a season to that of Rohini; after which, Hari, for the benefit of the 
three regions, became incarnate as the conception of the former princess, and 
Yoganidra as that of Yasoda, exactly as the supreme Vishnu had commanded. 
When the portion of Vishnu had become incorporate upon earth, the planetary 
bodies moved in brilliant order in the heavens, and the seasons were regular and 
genial. No person could bear to gaze upon Devaki, from the light that invested 
her; and those who contemplated her radiance felt their minds disturbed. The 
gods, invisible to mortals, celebrated her praises continually from the time that 
Vishnu was contained in her person. "Thou," said the divinities, "art that Prakriti, 
infinite and subtile, which formerly bore Brahma in its womb: then wast thou the 
goddess of speech, the energy of the creator of the universe, and the parent of the 
Vedas. Thou, eternal being, comprising in thy substance the essence of all 
created things, wast identical with creation: thou wast the parent of the triform 
sacrifice, becoming the germ of all things: thou art sacrifice, whence all fruit 
proceeds: thou art the wood, whose attrition engenders fire. As Aditi, thou art the 
parent of the gods; as Diti, thou art the mother of the Daityas, their foes. Thou 
art light, whence day is begotten: thou art humility, the mother of true wisdom: 
thou art kingly policy, the parent of order: thou art modesty, the progenitrix of 
affection: thou art desire, of whom love is born: thou art contentment, whence 
resignation is derived: thou art intelligence, the mother of knowledge: thou art 
patience, the parent of fortitude: thou art the heavens, and thy children are the 
stars: and from thee does all that exists proceed. Such, goddess, and thousands 
more, are thy mighty faculties; and now innumerable are the contents of thy 
womb, O mother of the universe. The whole earth, decorated with oceans, rivers, 
continents, cities, villages, hamlets, and towns; all the fires, waters, and winds; 
the stars, asterisms, and planets; the sky, crowded with the variegated chariots of 
the gods, and ether, that provides space for all substance; the several spheres of 
earth, sky, and heaven; of saints, sages, ascetics, and of Brahma; the whole egg 
of Brahma, with all its population of gods, demons, spirits, snake-gods, fiends, 


demons, ghosts, and imps, men and animals, and whatever creatures have life, 
comprised in him who is their eternal lord, and the object of all apprehension; 
whose real form, nature, name, and dimensions are not within human 
apprehension—are now with that Vishnu in thee. Thou art Swaha; thou art 
Swadha; thou art wisdom, ambrosia, light, and heaven. Thou hast descended 
upon earth for the preservation of the world. Have compassion upon us, O 
goddess, and do good unto the world. Be proud to bear that deity by whom the 
universe is upheld." 




Footnotes 

01. It is mentioned in the preceding chapter that they were all put to death, in 
which the Hari Vansa concurs. The Bhagavata makes Kansa spare them, 
and restore them to their parents, as he had nothing to apprehend from 
their existence. 




03. Chapter 


Birth of Krishna: conveyed by Vasudeva to Mathura, and exchanged with the 
new-born daughter of Yasoda. Kansa attempts to destroy the latter, who becomes 

Yoganidra. 

THUS eulogized by the gods, Devaki bore in her womb the lotus-eyed deity, the 
protector of the world. The sun of Achyuta rose in the dawn of Devaki to cause 
the lotus petal of the universe to expand. On the day of his birth the quarters of 
the horizon were irradiate with joy, as if moonlight was diffused over the whole 
earth. The virtuous experienced new delight, the strong winds were hushed, and 
the rivers glided tranquilly, when Janarddana was about to be born. The seas 
with their own melodious murmurings made the music, whilst the spirits and the 
nymphs of heaven danced and sang: the gods, walking the sky, showered down 
flowers upon the earth, and the holy fires glowed with a mild and gentle flame. 
At midnight, when the supporter of all was about to be born, the clouds emitted 
low pleasing sounds, and poured down rain of flowers. 

As soon as Anakadundubhi beheld the child, of the complexion of the lotus 
leaves, having four arms, and the mystic mark Srivatsa on his breast, he 
addressed him in terms of love and reverence, and represented the fears he 
entertained of Kansa. "Thou art born," said Vasudeva, "O sovereign god of gods, 
bearer of the shell, the discus, and the mace; but now in mercy withhold this thy 
celestial form, for Kansa will assuredly put me to death when he knows that thou 
hast descended in my dwelling." Devaki also exclaimed, "God of gods, who art 
all things, who comprisest all the regions of the world in thy person, and who by 
thine illusion hast assumed the condition of an infant, have compassion upon us, 
and forego this thy four-armed shape, nor let Kansa, the impious son of Diti, 
know of thy descent." 

To these applications Bhagavat answered and said, "Princess, in former times I 
was prayed to by thee and adored in the hope of progeny: thy prayers have been 
granted, for I am born thy son." So saying, he was silent: and Vasudeva, taking 
the babe, went out that same night; for the guards were all charmed by 
Yoganidra, as were the warders at the gates of Mathura, and they obstructed not 


the passage of Anakadundubhi. To protect the infant from the heavy rain that fell 
from the clouds of night, Sesha, the many-headed serpent, followed Vasudeva, 
and spread his hoods above their heads; and when the prince, with the child in 
his arms, crossed the Yamuna river, deep as it was, and dangerous with 
numerous whirlpools, the waters were stilled, and rose not above his knee.. On 
the bank he saw Nanda and the rest, who had come thither to bring tribute due to 
Kansa; but they beheld him not. At the same time Yasoda was also under the 
influence of Yoganidra, whom she had brought forth as her daughter, and whom 
the prudent Vasudeva took up, placing his son in her place by the side of the 
mother: he then quickly returned home. When Yasoda awoke, she found that she 
had been delivered of a boy, as black as the dark leaves of the lotus, and she was 
greatly rejoiced. 

Vasudeva, bearing off the female infant of Yasoda, reached his mansion 
unobserved, and entered and placed the child in the bed of Devaki: he then 
remained as usual. The guards were awakened by the cry of the new-born babe, 
and, starting up, they sent word to Kansa that Devaki had borne a child. Kansa 
immediately repaired to the residence of Vasudeva, where he seized upon the 
infant. In vain Devaki convulsively entreated him to relinquish the child: he 
threw it ruthlessly against a stone; but it rose into the sky, and expanded into a 
gigantic figure, having eight arms, each wielding some formidable weapon. This 
terrific being laughed aloud, and said to Kansa, "What avails it thee, Kansa, to 
have hurled me to the ground? he is born who shall kill thee, the mighty one 
amongst the gods, who was formerly thy destroyer. Now quickly secure him, and 
provide for thine own welfare." Thus having spoken, the goddess, decorated 
with heavenly perfumes and garlands, and hymned by the spirits of the air, 
vanished from before the eyes of Bhoja raja. 


Footnotes 

01. The Bhagavata more consistently makes Vasudeva find Nanda and the 
rest fast asleep in their houses, and subsequently describes their bringing 
tribute or tax (kara) to Kansa. 

02. Chief of the tribe of Bhoja, a branch of the Yadavas. 




04. Chapter 


Kansa addresses his friends, announces their danger, and orders male children to 

be put to death. 

KANSA, much troubled in mind, summoned all his principal Asuras, Pralamba, 
Kesin, and the rest, and said to them, "O valiant chiefs, Pralamba, Kesin, 
Dhenuka, Putana, Arishta, and all the rest of you, hear my words. The vile and 
contemptible denizens of heaven are assiduously plotting against my life, for 
they dread my prowess: but, heroes, I hold them of no account. What can the 
impotent Indra, or the ascetic Hara, perform? or what can Hari accomplish, 
except the murder of his foes by fraud? What have we to fear from the Adityas, 
the Vasus, the Agnis, or any others of the immortals, who have all been 
vanquished by my resistless arms? Have I not seen the king of the gods, when he 
had ventured into the conflict, quickly retreat from the field, receiving my shafts 
upon his back, not bravely upon his breast? When in resentment he withheld the 
fertilizing showers from my kingdom, did not my arrows compel the clouds to 
part with their waters, as much as were required? Are not all the monarchs of the 
earth in terror of my prowess, and subject to my orders, save only Jarasandha my 
sire? Now, chiefs of the Daitya race, it is my determination to inflict still deeper 
degradation upon these evil-minded and unprincipled gods. Let therefore every 
man who is notorious for liberality (in gifts to gods and Brahmans), every man 
who is remarkable for his celebration of sacrifices, be put to death, that thus the 

r 

gods shall be deprived of the means by which they subsist. The goddess who has 
been born as the infant child of Devaki has announced to me that he is again 
alive who in a former being was my death. Let therefore active search be made 
for whatever young children there may be upon earth, and let every boy in whom 
there are signs of unusual vigour be slain without remorse." 

Having issued these commands, Kansa retired into his palace, and liberated 
Vasudeva and Devaki from their captivity. "It is in vain," said he to them, "that I 
have slain all your children, since after all he who is destined to kill me has 
escaped. It is of no use to regret the past. The children you may hereafter have 
may enjoy life unto its natural close; no one shall cut it short." Having thus 
conciliated them, Kansa, alarmed for himself, withdrew into the interior 


apartments of his palace. 




Footnotes 

01. Jarasandha, prince of Magadha, was the father-in-law of Kansa. 




05. Chapter 


Nanda returns with the infants Krishna and Balarama to Gokula. Putana killed 
by the former. Prayers of Nanda and Yasoda. 

WHEN Vasudeva was set at liberty, he went to the waggon of Nanda, and found 
Nanda there rejoicing that a son was born to him. Vasudeva spake to him kindly, 
and congratulated him on having a son in his old age. "The yearly tribute," he 
added, "has been paid to the king, and men of property should not tarry near the 
court, when the business that brought them there has been transacted. Why do 
you delay, now that your affairs are settled? Up, Nanda, quickly, and set off to 
your own pastures; and let this boy, the son whom Rohini has borne me, 
accompany you, and be brought up by you as this your own son." Accordingly 
Nanda and the other cowherds, their goods being placed in their waggons, and 
their taxes having been paid to the king, returned to their village. 

Some time after they were settled at Gokula, the female fiend Putana, the child- 
killer, came thither by night, and finding the little Krishna asleep, took him up, 
and gave him her breast to suck. Now whatever child is suckled in the night by 
Putana instantly dies; but Krishna, laying hold of the breast with both hands, 
sucked it with such violence, that he drained it of the life; and the hideous 
Putana, roaring aloud, and giving way in every joint, fell on the ground expiring. 
The inhabitants of Vraja awoke in alarm at the cries of the fiend, ran to the spot, 
and beheld Putana lying on the earth, and Krishna in her arms. Yasoda snatching 
up Krishna, waved over him a cow-tail brush to guard him from harm, whilst 
Nanda placed dried cow-dung powdered upon his head; he gave him also an 
amulet, saying at the same time, "May Hari, the lord of all beings without 
reserve, protect you; he from the lotus of whose navel the world was developed, 
and on the tip of whose tusks the globe was upraised from the waters. May that 
Kesava, who assumed the form of a boar, protect thee. May that Kesava, who, as 
the man-lion, rent with his sharp nails the bosom of his foe, ever protect thee. 
May that Kesava, who, appearing first as the dwarf, suddenly traversed in all his 
might, with three paces, the three regions of the universe, constantly defend thee. 
May Govinda guard thy head; Kesava thy neck; Vishnu thy belly; Janarddana 
thy legs and feet; the eternal and irresistible Narayana thy face, thine arms, thy 


mind, and faculties of sense. May all ghosts, goblins, and spirits malignant and 
unfriendly, ever fly thee, appalled by the bow, the discus, mace, and sword of 

r 

Vishnu, and the echo of his shell. May Vaikuntha guard thee in the cardinal 
points; and in the intermediate ones, Madhusudana. May Rishikesa defend thee 
in the sky, and Mahidhara upon earth." Having pronounced this prayer to avert 
all evil, Nanda put the child to sleep in his bed underneath the waggon. 
Beholding the vast carcass of Putana, the cowherds were filled with 
astonishment and terror. 




Footnotes 

01. It is literally 'went to the cart' or 'waggon;' as if Nanda and his family 
dwelt in such a vehicle, as the Scythians are said to have done. The 
commentator explains Sakata 'the place of loosing or unharnessing the 
waggon.' In the Bhagavata, Vasudeva does not quit Mathura, but goes to 
the halting ground of Nanda, who has come to that city to pay his taxes: 
explained by the comment. 

02. In the Hari Vansa this female fiend is described as coming in the shape of 
a bird. 

03. The Raksha, the preserver, or preservative against charms, is a piece of 
thread or silk, or some more costly material, bound round the wrist or 
arm, with an appropriate prayer such as that in the text. Besides its 
application to children, to avert the effects of evil eyes, or to protect them 
against Dains or witches, there is one day in the year, the Rakhi Purnima, 
or full moon in the month of Sravan (July—August), when it is bound 
upon the wrists of adults by friendly or kindred Brahmans, with a short 
prayer or benediction. The Rakhi is also sent sometimes by persons of 
distinction, and especially by females, to members of a different family, 
or even race and nation, to intimate a sort of brotherly or sisterly 
adoption. Tod's Rajasthan, I. 312. 




06. Chapter 


Krishna overturns a waggon; casts down two trees. The Gopas depart to 
Vrindavana. Sports of the boys. Description of the season of the rains. 

ON one occasion, whilst Madhusudana was asleep underneath the waggon, he 
cried for the breast, and kicking up his feet he overturned the vehicle, and all the 
pots and pans were upset and broken. The cowherds and their wives, hearing the 
noise, came exclaiming, "Ah! ah!" and there they found the child sleeping on his 
back. "Who could have upset the waggon?" said the cowherds. "This child," 
replied some boys, who witnessed the circumstance; "we saw him," said they, 
"crying, and kicking the waggon with his feet, and so it was overturned: no one 
else had any thing to do with it." The cowherds were exceedingly astonished at 
this account; and Nanda, not knowing what to think, took up the boy; whilst 
Yasoda offered worship to the broken pieces of pots and to the waggon, with 
curds, flowers, fruit, and unbruised grain. 

The initiatory rites requisite for the two boys were performed by Garga, who was 
sent to Gokula by Vasudeva for that purpose: he celebrated them without the 
knowledge of the cowherds and the wise sage, eminent amongst the wise, named 
the elder of them Rama, and the other Krishna. In a short time they began to 
crawl about the ground, supporting themselves on their hands and knees, and 
creeping every where, often amidst ashes and filth. Neither Rohini nor Yasoda 
was able to prevent them from getting into the cowpens, or amongst the calves, 
where they amused themselves by pulling their tails. As they disregarded the 
prohibitions of Yasoda, and rambled about together constantly, she became 
angry, and taking up a stick, followed them, and threatened the dark- 
complexioned Krishna with a whipping. Fastening a cord round his waist, she 
tied him to the wooden mortar, and being in a great passion, she said to him, 
"Now, you naughty boy, get away from hence if you can." She then went about 
her domestic affairs. As soon as she had departed, the lotus-eyed Krishna, 
endeavouring to extricate himself, pulled the mortar after him to the space 
between two Arjuna trees that grew near together: having dragged the mortar 
between these trees, it became wedged awry there, and as Krishna pulled it 
through, it pulled down the trunks of the trees. Hearing the crackling noise, the 


people of Vraja came to see what was the matter, and there they beheld the two 
large trees, with shattered stems and broken branches, prostrate on the ground, 
with the child fixed between them, with a rope round his belly, laughing, and 
shewing his white little teeth, just budded. It is hence that Krishna is called 
Damodara, from the binding of the rope (dama) round his belly (udara). The 
elders of the cowherds, with Nanda at their head, looked upon these 
circumstances with alarm, considering them as of evil omen. "We cannot remain 
in this place," said they; "let us go to some other part of the forest; for here many 
evil signs threaten us with destruction; the death of Putana, the upsetting of the 
waggon, and the fall of the trees without their being blown down by the wind. 
Let us depart hence without delay, and go to Vrindavana, where terrestrial 
prodigies may no more disturb us." 

Having thus resolved, the inhabitants of Vraja communicated their intention to 
their families, and desired them to move without delay. Accordingly they set off 
with their waggons and their cattle, driving before them their bulls and cows and 
calves; the fragments of their household stores they threw away, and in an instant 
Vraja was overspread with flights of crows. Vrindavana was chosen by Krishna, 
whom acts do not affect, for the sake of providing for the nourishment of the 
kine; for there in the hottest season the new grass springs up as verdantly as in 
the rains. Having repaired, then, from Vraja to Vrindavana, the inhabitants of the 
former drew up their waggons in the form of a crescent. 

As the two boys, Rama and Damodara, grew up, they were ever together in the 
same place, and engaged in the same boyish sports. They made themselves crests 
of the peacocks' plumes, and garlands of forest flowers, and musical instruments 
of leaves and reeds, or played upon the pipes used by the cowherds: their hair 
was trimmed like the wings of the crow, and they resembled two young princes, 
portions of the deity of war: they were robust, and they roamed about, always 
laughing and playing, sometimes with each other, sometimes with other boys; 
driving along with the young cowherds the calves to pasture. Thus the two 
guardians of the world were keepers of cattle, until they had attained seven years 
of age, in the cow-pens of Vrindavan. 

Then came on the season of the rains, when the atmosphere laboured with 
accumulated clouds, and the quarters of the horizon were blended into one by the 
driving showers. The waters of the rivers rose, and overflowed their banks, and 



spread beyond all bounds, like the minds of the weak and wicked transported 
beyond restraint by sudden prosperity. The pure radiance of the moon was 
obscured by heavy vapours, as the lessons of holy writ are darkened by the 
arrogant scoffs of fools (and unbelievers). The bow of Indra held its place in the 
heavens all unstrung, like a worthless man elevated by an injudicious prince to 
honour. The white line of storks appeared upon the back of the cloud, in such 
contrast as the bright conduct of a man of respectability opposes to the behaviour 
of a scoundrel. The ever-fitful lightning, in its new alliance with the sky, was like 
the friendship of a profligate for a man of worth. Overgrown by the spreading 
grain, the paths were indistinctly traced, like the speech of the ignorant, that 
conveys no positive meaning. 

At this time Krishna and Rama, accompanied by the cow-boys, traversed the 
forests, that echoed with the hum of bees and the peacock's cry. Sometimes they 
sang in chorus, or danced together; sometimes they sought shelter from the cold 
beneath the trees; sometimes they decorated themselves with flowery garlands, 
sometimes with peacocks' feathers; sometimes they stained themselves of 
various hues with the minerals of the mountain; sometimes weary they reposed 
on beds of leaves, and sometimes imitated in mirth the muttering of the 
thundercloud; sometimes they excited their juvenile associates to sing, and 
sometimes they mimicked the cry of the peacock with their pipes. In this manner 
participating in various feelings and emotions, and affectionately attached to 
each other, they wandered, sporting and happy, through the wood. At 
eveningtide came Krishna and Balarama, like two cow-boys, along with the 
cows and the cowherds. At eveningtide the two immortals, having come to the 
cow-pens, joined heartily in whatever sports amused the sons of the herdsmen. 


Footnotes 

01. The Bhagavata describes Garga's interview with Nanda, and the 
inducements of the latter to keep the former's celebration of the 
Sanskaras, or initiatory rites of the two boys, secret from the Gopas. 
Garga there describes himself as the Purdhit, or family priest, of the 
Yadavas. 


02. The Ulukhala, or mortar is a large wooden bowl on a solid stand of 
timber, both cut out of one piece; the pestle is also of wood; and they are 
used chiefly for bruising or threshing unwinnowed corn, and separating 
the chaff from the grain. As important agents in household economy, they 
are regarded as sacred, and even hymned in the Vedas. 

03. Our text, and that of the Hari Vansa, take no notice of the legend of 
Nalakuvera and Mariigriva, sons of Kuvera, who, according to the 
Bhagavata, had been metamorphosed, through a curse of Narada, into 
these two trees, and for whose liberation this feat of Krishna was 
intended. 

04. The Hari Vansa, not satisfied with the prodigies which had alarmed the 
cowherds, adds another, not found, it is believed, any where else. The 
emigration, according to that work, originates, not with the Gopas, but 
the two boys, who wish to go to Vrindavana, and in order to compel the 
removal, Krishna converts the hairs of his body into hundreds of wolves, 
who so harass and alarm the inhabitants of Vraja, that they determine to 
abandon their homes. 

05. The Kaka-paksha, or crow's wing, implies the hair left on each side of the 
head, the top being shaved. 




07. Chapter 


Krishna combats the serpent Kaliya: alarm of his parents and companions: he 
overcomes the serpent, and is propitiated by him: commands him to depart from 
the Yamuna river to the ocean. 

ONE day Krishna, unaccompanied by Rama, went to Vrindavan: he was 
attended by a troop of cowherds, and gaily decorated with wild flowers. On his 
way he came to the Yamuna, which was flowing in sportive undulations, and 
sparkling with foam, as if with smiles, as the waves dashed against the borders. 
Within its bed, however, was the fearful pool of the serpent Kaliya, boiling with 
the fires of poison from the fumes of which, large trees upon the bank were 
blighted, and by whose waters, when raised by a gale into the air, birds were 
scorched. Beholding this dreadful lake, which was like another mouth of death, 
Madhusudana reflected that the wicked and poisonous Kaliya, who had been 
vanquished by himself (in the person of Garuda), and had been obliged to fly 
from the ocean (where he had inhabited the island Ramariaka), must be lurking 
at its bottom, and defiling the Yamuna, the consort of the sea, so that neither men 
nor cattle could slake their thirst by her waters. Such being the case, he 
determined to dislodge the Naga, and enable the dwellers of Vraja to frequent the 
vicinage without fear; for it was the especial purpose he considered of his 
descent upon earth to reduce to subjection all such violators of law. "Here," 
thought he, "is a Kadamba tree, which is sufficiently near; I can climb up it, and 
thence leap into the serpent's pool." Having thus resolved, he bound his clothes 
tightly about him, and jumped boldly into the lake of the serpent-king. The 
waters, agitated by his plunge amidst them, were scattered to a considerable 
distance from the bank, and the spray falling upon the trees, they were 
immediately set on fire by the heat of the poisonous vapour combined with the 
water; and the whole horizon was in a blaze. Krishna, having dived into the pool, 
struck his arms in defiance, and the snake-king, hearing the sound, quickly came 
forth: his eyes were coppery red, and his hoods were flaming with deadly 
venom: he was attended by many other powerful and poisonous snakes, feeders 
upon air, and by hundreds of serpent-nymphs, decorated with rich jewels, whose 
earrings glittered with trembling radiance as the wearers moved along. Coiling 
themselves around Krishna, they all bit him with teeth from which fiery poison 


was emitted. Krishna's companions, beholding him in the lake, encompassed by 
the snakes, twining around him, ran off to Vraja, lamenting and bewailing aloud 
his fate. "Krishna," they called out, "has foolishly plunged into the serpent's 
pool, and is there bitten to death by the snake-king! Come and see." The 
cowherds and their wives and Yasoda, hearing this news, which was like a 
thunderbolt, ran immediately to the pool, frightened out of their senses, and 
crying, "Alas! alas! where is he?" The Gopis were retarded by Yasoda, who in 
her agitation stumbled and slipped at every step; but Nanda and the cowherds 
and the invincible Rama hastened to the banks of the Yamuna, eager to assist 
Krishna. There they beheld him apparently in the power of the serpent-king, 
encompassed by twining snakes, and making no effort to escape. Nanda, as soon 
as he set his eyes upon his son, became senseless; and Yasoda also, when she 
beheld him, lost all consciousness. The Gopis, overcome with sorrow, wept, and 
called affectionately, and with convulsive sobs, upon Kesava. "Let us all," said 
they, "plunge with Yasoda into the fearful pool of the serpent-king. We cannot 
return to Vraja; for what is day, without the sun? what night, without the moon? 
what is a herd of heifers, without its lord? what is Vraja, without Krishna? 
Deprived of him, we will go no more to Gokula. The forest will lose its delights; 
it will be like a lake without water. When this dark lotus leaf complexioned Hari 
is not present, there is no joy in the maternal dwelling. How strange is this! And 
as for you, ye cowherds, how, poor beings, will you live amidst the pastures, 
when you no longer behold the brilliant lotus eyes of Hari? Our hearts have been 
wiled away by the music of his voice. We will not go without Puridarikaksha to 
the folds of Nanda. Even now, though held in the coils of the serpent-king, see, 
friends, hew his face brightens with smiles as we gaze upon him." 

When the mighty son of Rohirii, Balarama, heard these exclamations of the 
Gopis, and with disdainful glance beheld the cowherds overcome with terror, 
Nanda gazing fixedly upon the countenance of his son, and Yasoda unconscious, 
he spake to Krishna in his own character: "What is this, O god of gods! the 
quality of mortal is sufficiently assumed; dost thou not know thyself eternal? 
Thou art the centre of creation, as the nave is of the spokes of a wheel. A portion 
of thee have I also been born, as thy senior. The gods, to partake of thy pastimes 
as man, have all descended under a like disguise; and the goddesses have come 
down to Gokula to join in thy sports. Thou, eternal, hast last of all appeared 
below. Wherefore, Krishna, dost thou disregard these divinities, who, as 
cowherds, are thy friends and kin? these sorrowing females, who also are thy 



relations? Thou hast put on the character of man; thou hast exhibited the tricks of 
childhood: now let this fierce snake, though armed with venomed fangs, be 
subdued (by thy celestial vigour)." 

Thus reminded of his real character by Rama, Krishna smiled gently, and 
speedily extricated himself from the coils of the snakes. Laying hold of the 
middle hood of their chief with both his hands, he bent it down, and set his foot 
upon the hitherto unbended head, and danced upon it in triumph. Wherever the 
snake attempted to raise his head, it was again trodden down, and many bruises 
were inflicted on the hood by the pressure of the toes of Krishna. Trampled upon 
by the feet of Krishna, as they changed position in the dance, the snake fainted, 
and vomited forth much blood. Beholding the head and neck of their lord thus 
injured, and the blood flowing from his mouth, the females of the snake-king 
implored the clemency of Madhusudana. "Thou art recognised, O god of gods!" 
they exclaimed; "thou art the sovereign of all; thou art light supreme, 
inscrutable; thou art the mighty lord, the portion of that supreme light. The gods 
themselves are unable worthily to praise thee, the lord self-existent: how then 
shall females proclaim thy nature? How shall we fully declare him of whom the 
egg of Brahma, made up of earth, sky, water, fire, and air, is but a small portion 
of a part? Holy sages have in vain sought to know thy eternal essence. We bow 
to that form which is the most subtile of atoms, the largest of the large; to him 
whose birth is without a creator, whose end knows no destroyer, and who alone 
is the cause of duration. There is no wrath in thee; for thine is the protection of 
the world; and hence this chastisement of Kaliya. Yet hear us. Women are to be 
regarded with pity by the virtuous: animals are humanely treated even by fools. 
Let therefore the author of wisdom have compassion upon this poor creature. 
Thyself, as an oviparous, hooded snake, art the upholder of the world. Oppressed 
by thee, he will speedily perish. What is this feeble serpent, compared to thee in 
whom the universe reposes? Friendship and enmity are felt towards equals and 
superiors, not for those infinitely beneath us. Then, sovereign of the world, have 
mercy upon us. This unfortunate snake is about to expire: give us, as a gift of 
charity, our husband." 

When they had thus spoken, the Naga himself, almost exanimate, repeated 
feebly their solicitations for mercy. "Forgive me," the murmured, "O god of 
gods! How shall I address thee, who art possessed, through thine own strength 
and essence, of the eight great faculties, in energy unequalled? Thou art the 



supreme, the progenitor of the supreme (Brahma): thou art the supreme spirit, 
and from thee the supreme proceeds: thou art beyond all finite objects; how can I 
speak thy praise? How can I declare his greatness, from whom cone Brahma, 
Rudra, Chandra, Indra, the Maruts, the Aswins, the Vasus, and Adityas; of whom 
the whole world is an infinitely small portion, a portion destined to represent his 
essence; and whose nature, primitive or derived, Brahma and the immortals do 
not comprehend? How can I approach him, to whom the gods offer incense and 
flowers culled from the groves of Nandana; whose incarnate forms the king of 
the deities ever adores, unconscious of his real person; whom the sages, that 
have withdrawn their senses from all external objects, worship in thought, and 
enshrining his image in the purposes of their hearts, present to it the flowers of 
sanctity? I am quite unable, O god of gods, to worship or to hymn thee. Thy own 
clemency must alone influence thy mind to shew me compassion. It is the nature 
of snakes to be savage, and I am born of their kind: hence this is my nature, not 
mine offence. The world is created, as it is destroyed, by thee; and the species, 
form, and nature of all things in the world are thy work. Even such as thou hast 
created me in kind, in form, and in nature, such I am, and such are my actions: 
should I act differently, then indeed should I deserve thy punishment, for so thou 
hast declared. Yet that I have been punished by thee is indeed a blessing; for 
punishment from thee alone is a favour. Behold I am now without strength, 
without poison; deprived of both by thee. Spare me my life; I ask no more. 
Command me what I shall do." 

Being thus addressed by Kaliya, Krishna replied, "You must not tarry here, nor 
any where in the stream of the Yamuna; depart immediately, with your family 
and followers, to the sea; where Garuda, the foe of the serpent race, will not 
harm you, when he sees the impressions of my feet upon your brow." So saying, 
Hari set the snake-king at liberty, who, bowing reverentially to his victor, 
departed to the ocean; abandoning, in the sight of all, the lake he had haunted, 
accompanied by all his females, children, and dependants. When the snake was 
gone, the Gopas hailed Govinda, as one risen from the dead, and embraced him, 
and bathed his forehead with tears of joy: others, contemplating the water of the 
river, now freed from peril, were filled with wonder, and sang the praise of 
Krishna, who is unaffected by works. Thus eminent by his glorious exploits, and 
eulogized by the Gopas and Gopas, Krishna returned to Vraja. 





Footnotes 


01. The commentator says this means nothing more than that the waters of 
the pool were hot. I do not know if hot springs have been found in the 
bed or on the borders of the Jumna: the hot well of Sita-kund, near 
Mongir, is not far from the Ganges. 

02. Slapping the upper part of one arm with the hand of the other is a 
common act of defiance amongst Indian athletae. 

03. The expressions are ### and ### and Rechaka and Daridapata, which are 
said to be different dispositions of the feet in dancing; variations of the 
bhrama or pirouette; the latter is the a-plomb or descent. It is also read 
Daridapada-nipata, the falling of the feet, like that of a club. 

04. Bhava-pushpas: there are said to be eight such flowers, clemency, self- 
restraint, tenderness, patience, resignation, devotion, meditation, and 
truth. 

05. Both in the Vedas and in the institutes of law; where it is enjoined that 
every one shall discharge the duties of his caste and condition, and any 
deviation from them merits punishment; as by the texts 'In following 
prohibited observances, a person is punishable' and 'Who does acts 
unsuited to his natural disposition, incurs guilt.' 




08. Chapter 


The demon Dhenuka destroyed by Rama. 

AGAIN, tending upon the herds, Kesava and Rama wandered through the 
woods, and on one occasion came to a pleasing grove of palms, where dwelt the 
fierce demon Dhenuka, feeding upon the flesh of deer. Beholding the trees 
covered with fruit, and desirous of gathering it, the cowherds called out to the 
brothers, and said, "See, Rama; see, Krishna; in this grove, belonging to the great 
Dhenuka, the trees are loaded with ripe fruit, the smell of which perfumes the 
air: we should like to eat some. Will you throw some down?" As soon as the 
boys had spoken, Sankarsharia and Krishna shook the trees, and brought down 
the fruit on the ground. Hearing the noise of the falling fmit, the fierce and 
malignant demon Dhenuka, in the form of an ass, hastened to the spot in a great 
passion, and began to kick Rama on the breast with his hinder heels. Rama, 
however, seized him by both hind legs, and whirling him round until he expired, 
tossed his carcass to the top of a palm tree, from the branches of which it struck 
down abundance of fruit, like rain drops poured upon earth by the wind. The 
animals that were of kin to Dhenuka came running to his aid; but Krishna and 
Rama treated them in the same manner, until the trees were laden with dead 
asses, and the ground was strewed with ripe fruit. Henceforward the cattle 
grazed unobstructed in the palm grove, and cropped the new pasturage, where 
they had never before ventured. 




Footnotes 

01. This exploit is related in the Bhagavata, Hari Vansa, and other Vaishriava 
Purarias, much in the same strain, but not always in the same place: it 
more commonly precedes the legend of the discomfiture of Kaliya. 




09. Chapter 


Sports of the boys in the forest. Pralamba the Asura comes amongst them: is 
destroyed by Rama, at the command of Krishna. 

WHEN the demon in the form of an ass, and all his tribe, had been destroyed, 
the grove of palms became the favourite resort of the Gopas and their wives, and 
the sons of Vasudeva, greatly pleased, repaired to the Bhandira fig tree. They 
continued to wander about, shouting and singing, and gathering fruits and 
flowers from the trees; now driving the cows afar to pasture; now calling them 
by their names; now carrying the foot-ropes of the kine upon their shoulders; 
now ornamenting themselves with garlands of forest flowers, they looked like 
two young bulls when the horns first appear. Attired the one in yellow, and the 
other in sable garments, they looked like two clouds, one white, and one black, 
surmounted by the bow of Indra. Sporting mutually with frolics beneficial to the 
world, they roamed about like two monarchs over all the collected sovereigns of 
the earth. Assuming human duties, and maintaining the human character, they 
strayed through the thickets, amusing themselves with sports suited to their 
mortal species and condition, in swinging on the boughs of trees, or in boxing 
and wrestling and hurling stones. 

Having observed the two lads thus playing about, the Asura Pralamba, seeking to 
devour them, came amongst the cowherd boys in the shape of one of themselves, 
and mixed, without being suspected, in their pastimes; for he thought, that, thus 
disguised, it would not be difficult to find an opportunity to kill, first Krishna, 
and afterwards the son of Rohifh. The boys commenced playing at the game of 
leaping like deer, two and two together. Govinda was matched with Sridaman, 
and Balarama with Pralamba: the other boys were coupled with one another, and 
went leaping away. Govinda beat his companion, and Balarama his; and the boys 
who were on Krishna's side were also victorious. Carrying one another, they 
reached the Bhandira fig; and from thence those who were victors were 
conveyed back to the starting-ground by those who were vanquished. It being 
Pralamba's duty to carry Sankarshana, the latter mounted upon his shoulders, 
like the moon riding above a dark cloud; and the demon ran off with him, but did 
not stop: finding himself, however, unable to bear the weight of Balarama, he 


enlarged his bulk, and looked like a black cloud in the rainy season, Balarama 
beholding him like a scorched mountain, his head crowned with a diadem, and 
his neck hung round with garlands, having eyes as large as cart wheels, a fearful 
form, and shaking the earth with his tread, called out, as he was carried away, to 
his brother, "Krishna, Krishna, I am carried off by some demon, disguised as a 
cowherd, and huge as a mountain! What shall I do? Tell me, Madhusudana: the 
villain runs away with speed!" Krishna opened his mouth, smiling, for he well 
knew the might of the son of Rohini, and replied, "Why this subtle pretext of 
merely mortal nature? thou who art the soul of all the most subtile of subtile 
things. Remember yourself, the radical cause of the whole world; born before all 
cause, and all that is alone when the world is destroyed. Dost thou not know that 
you and I are alike the origin of the world, who have come down to lighten its 
load? The heavens are thy head; the waters are thy body; earth is thy feet; thy 
mouth is eternal fire; the moon is thy mind; the wind thy breath; thy arms and 
hands are the four regions of space. Thou hast, O mighty lord, a thousand heads, 
a thousand hands and feet and bodies; a thousand Brahmas spring from thee, 
who art before all, and whom the sages praise in myriads of forms. No one but I 
knoweth thy divine person. Thy incarnate person is glorified by all the gods. 
Knowest thou not, that, at the end of all, the universe disappears in thee? that, 
upheld by thee, this earth sustains living and inanimate things? and that, in the 
character of uncreated time, with its divisions of ages, developed from an 
instant, thou devourest the world? As the waters of the sea, when swallowed up 
by submarine flame, are recovered by the winds, and thrown, in the form of 
snow, upon the Himachala, where coming into contact with the rays of the sun, 
they reassume their watery nature so the world, being devoured by thee at the 
period of dissolution, becomes of necessity, at the end of every Kalpa, the world 
again, through thy creative efforts. Thou and I, soul of the universe, are but one 
and the same cause of the creation of the earth, although, for its protection, we 
exist in distinct individuals. Calling to memory who thou art, O being of 
illimitable might, destroy of thyself the demon. Suspending a while your mortal 
character, do what is right." 

Thus reminded by the magnanimous Krishna, the powerful Baladeva laughed, 
and squeezed Pralamba with his knees, striking him at the same time on the head 
and face with his fists, so as to beat out both his eyes. The demon, vomiting 
blood from his mouth, and having his brain forced through the skull, fell upon 
the ground, and expired. The Gopas, beholding Pralamba slain, were astonished, 



and rejoiced, and cried out, "Well done," and praised Balarama: and thus 
commended by his playfellows, and accompanied by Krishna, Bala, after the 
death of the daitya Pralamba, returned to Gokula. 


Footnotes 

01. Jumping with both feet at once, as deer bound, two boys together: the 
one that holds out longest, or comes to a given point first, is the victor, 
and the vanquished is then bound to carry him to the goal, if not already 
attained, and back again to the starting-post, on his shoulders. The 
Bhagavata does not specify the game, but mentions that the vanquished 
carry the victors on their backs. 

02. This passage is read and explained differently in different copies. In some 
it is, ###. And this is explained, 'The water of the ocean, devoured by the 
fire called Vadava, becoming condensed, or in the form of dew or snow, 
is seized by the wind called Kastaka, from which the Vadava fire has 
departed, consisting of a pipe of the solar rays, and being placed in the 
air, lies or is on the Himachala,' &c. This is rather an awkward and 
confused representation of the notion, and the other reading is somewhat 
preferable: it consists simply in substituting ### for ### that is, according 
to the commentary, 'The water devoured by the fire is thrown by the wind 
Ka, made of a solar ray &c., on the Himachala, where it assumes the 
form of snow;' and so on. However disfigured by inaccurate views of 
some of the instruments in operation, the physiology is in the main very 
correct, and indicates accurate observation of natural phenomena. The 
waters of the ocean, converted into vapour by solar heat, are raised by the 
same influence into the air, and thence borne by the winds to the summits 
of lofty mountain ranges, where they are arrested by a diminished 
temperature, descend in the form of snow, and again supply the streams 
that perpetually restore to the sea the treasures of which it is as 
perpetually plundered. 

03. According to the Hari Vansa the gods themselves praised this proof of 
Rama's strength (bala), and hence he derived the name of Balarama. 








10. Chapter 


Description of autumn. Krishna dissuades Nanda from worshipping Indra: 
recommends him and the Gopas to worship cattle and the mountains. 

WHILST Kesava and Rama were sporting thus in Vraja, the rainy season ended, 
and was succeeded by the season of autumn, when the lotus is full blown. The 
small Saphari fish, in their watery burrows, were oppressed by the heat, like a 
man by selfish desires, who is devoted to his family. The peacocks, no longer 
animated by passion, were silent amidst the woods, like holy saints, who have 
come to know the unreality of the world. The clouds, of shining whiteness, 
exhausted of their watery wealth, deserted the atmosphere, like those who have 
acquired wisdom, and depart from their homes. Evaporated by the rays of the 
autumnal sun, the lakes were dried up, like the hearts of men when withered by 
the contact of selfishness. The pellucid waters of the season were suitably 
embellished by white water-lilies, as are the minds of the pure by the 
apprehension of truth. Brightly in the starry sky shone the moon with 
undiminished orb, like the saintly being, who has reached the last stage of bodily 
existence, in the company of the pious. The rivers and lakes slowly retired from 
their banks, as the wise by degrees shrink from the selfish attachment that 
connects them with wife and child. First abandoned by the waters of the lake, the 
swans again began to congregate, like false ascetics, whose devotions are 
interrupted, and they are again assailed by innumerable afflictions. The ocean 
was still and calm, and exhibited no undulations, like the perfect sage, who has 
completed his course of restraint, and has acquired undisturbed tranquillity of 
spirit. Every where the waters were as clear and pure as the minds of the wise, 
who behold Vishnu in all things. The autumnal sky was wholly free from clouds, 
like the heart of the ascetic, whose care's have been consumed by the fire of 
devotion. The moon allayed the fervours of the sun, as discrimination alleviates 
the pain to which egotism gives birth. The clouds of the atmosphere, the 
muddiness of the earth, the discoloration of the waters, were all removed by 
autumn, as abstraction detaches the senses from the objects of perception. The 
exercise of inspiring, suppressing, and expiring the vital air, was as if performed 
daily by the waters of the lakes (as they were full, and stationary, and then again 
declined). 


At this season, when the skies were bright with stars, Krishna, repairing to Vraja, 
found all the cowherds busily engaged in preparing for a sacrifice to be offered 
to Indra and going to the elders, he asked them, as if out of curiosity, what 
festival of Indra it was in which they took so much pleasure. Nanda replied to his 
question, and said, "Satakratu or Indra is the sovereign of the clouds and of the 
waters: sent by him, the former bestow moisture upon the earth, whence springs 
the grain, by which we and all embodied beings subsist; with which also, and 
with water, we please the gods: hence too these cows bear calves, and yield milk, 
and are happy, and well nourished. So when the clouds are seen distended with 
rain, the earth is neither barren of corn, nor bare of verdure, nor is man distressed 
by hunger. Indra, the giver of water, having drank the milk of earth by the solar 
ray, sheds it again upon the earth for the sustenance of all the world. On this 
account all sovereign princes offer with pleasure sacrifices to Indra at the end of 
the rains, and so also do we, and so do other people." 

When Krishna heard this speech from Nanda in regard to the worship of Indra, 
he determined to put the king of the celestials into a passion, and replied, "We, 
father, are neither cultivators of the soil, nor dealers in merchandise; we are 
sojourners in forests, and cows are our divinities. There are four branches of 
knowledge, logical, scriptural, practical, and political. Hear me describe what 
practical science is. Agriculture, commerce, and tending of cattle; the knowledge 
of these three professions constitutes practical science. Agriculture is the 
subsistence of farmers; buying and selling, of traders. Kine are our support. Thus 
the knowledge of means of support is threefold. The object that is cultivated by 
any one should be to him as his chief divinity; that should be venerated and 
worshipped, as it is his benefactor. He who worships the deity of another, and 
diverts from him the reward that is his due, obtains not a prosperous station 
either in this world or in the next. Where the land ceases to be cultivated there 
are bounds assigned, beyond which commences the forest; the forests are 
bounded by the hills, and so far do our limits extend. We are not shut in with 
doors, nor confined within walls; we have neither fields nor houses; we wander 
about happily wherever we list, travelling in our waggons. The spirits of these 
mountains, it is said, walk the woods in whatever forms they will, or in their 
proper persons sport upon their own precipices. If they should be displeased with 
those who inhabit the forests, then, transformed to lions and beasts of prey, they 
will kill the offenders. We then are bound to worship the mountains; to offer 



sacrifices to cattle. What have we to do with Indra? cattle and mountains are our 
gods. Brahmans offer worship with prayer; cultivators of the earth adore their 
landmarks; but we who tend our herds in the forests and mountains should 
worship them and our kine. Let prayer and offerings then be addressed to the 
mountain Govarddhana, and kill a victim in due form. Let the whole station 
collect their milk without delay, and feed with it the Brahmans and all who may 
desire to partake of it. When the oblations have been presented, and the 
Brahmans have been fed, let the Gopas circumambulate the cows, decorated 
with garlands of autumnal flowers. If the cowherds will attend to these 
suggestions, they will secure the favour of the mountain, of the cattle, and also 
mine." 

When Nanda and the other Gopas heard these words of Krishna, their faces 
expanded with delight, and they said that he had spoken well. "You have judged 
rightly, child," exclaimed they; "we will do exactly as you have proposed, and 
offer adoration to the mountain." Accordingly the inhabitants of Vraja 
worshipped the mountain, presenting to it curds and milk and flesh; and they fed 
hundreds and thousands of Brahmans, and many other guests, who came to the 
ceremony, even as Krishna had enjoined: and when they had made their 
offerings, they circumambulated the cows and the bulls, that bellowed as loud as 
roaring clouds. Upon the summit of Govarddhana, Krishna presented himself, 
saying, "I am the mountain," and partook of much food presented by the Gopas; 
whilst in his own form as Krishna he ascended the hill along with the cowherds, 
and worshipped his other self. Having promised them many blessings, the 
mountain-person of Krishna vanished; and the ceremony being completed, the 
cowherds returned to their station. 


Footnotes 

01. A set of very poor quibbles upon the terms of the Prariayama: or, Purana, 
drawing in the breath through one nostril; literally, 'filling:' Kumbhaka, 
closing the nostrils, and suppressing the breath; keeping it stationary or 
confined, as it were in a Kumbha, or waterpot: and Rechaka, opening the 
other nostril, and emitting the breath; literally, 'purging' or 'depletion.' 


The waters of the reservoirs, replenished in the beginning of the 
autumnal season by the previous rains, remain for a while full, until they 
are drawn off for irrigation, or reduced by evaporation: thus representing 
the three operations of Purana, Kumbhaka, and Rechaka. 

02. No public worship is offered to Indra at present; and the only festival in 
the Hindu kalendar, the Sakradhwajotthana, the erection of a flag in 
honour of Sakra or Indra, should be held on the twelfth or thirteenth of 
Bhadra, which is in the very middle of the rainy season; according to the 
Tithi Tatwa, following the authority of the Kalika and Bhavishyottara 
Puranas. The Sakradhwajotthana is also a rite to be performed by kings 
and princes. It may be doubted, therefore, if the text intends any 
particular or appointed celebration. 

03. Or, Anvikshiki, the science of inquiring by reasoning, Tarka, or logic: 
Trayi, the three Vedas collectively, or the doctrines they teach: Vartta, 
rendered 'practical,' is the knowledge of the means of acquiring 
subsistence: the fourth is Daridaniti, the science of government, both 
domestic and foreign. 

04. These nomadic habits are entirely lost sight of in the parallel passages of 
those Puranas in which the juvenile life of Krishna is narrated. The text 
of the Hari Vansa is in most of the other verses precisely the same as that 
of the Vishnu P., putting however into the mouth of Krishna a long 
additional eulogium on the season of autumn. 

05. The Hari Vansa says, 'an illusory Krishna, having become the mountain, 
ate the flesh that was offered.' Of course the 'personified' mountain is 
intended, as appears from several of the ensuing passages; as for 
instance, he says presently, 'I am satisfied; and then in his divine form he 
smiled.' The Hari Vansa affords here, as in so many other places, proofs 
of its Dakhini origin. It is very copious upon the homage paid to the 
cattle, and their decoration with garlands and plumes of peacocks' 
feathers, of which our text takes no notice. But in the south of India there 
is a very popular festival, that of the Punjal, scarcely known in the north, 
when cattle are decorated and worshipped; a celebration which has no 
doubt suggested to the compiler of the Hari Vansa the details which he 
describes. 




11. Chapter 


Indra, offended by the loss of his offerings, causes heavy rain to deluge Gokula. 
Krishna holds up the mountain Govarddhana to shelter the cowherds and their 
cattle. 

INDRA, being thus disappointed of his offerings, was exceedingly angry, and 
thus addressed a cohort of his attendant clouds, called Samvarttaka: "Ho, 
clouds," he said, "hear my words, and without delay execute what I command. 
The insensate cowherd Nanda, assisted by his fellows, has withheld the usual 
offerings to us, relying upon the protection of Krishna. Now, therefore, afflict the 
cattle, that are their sustenance, and whence their occupation is derived, with 
rain and wind. Mounted upon my elephant, as vast as a mountain peak, I will 
give you aid in strengthening the tempest." When Indra ceased, the clouds, 
obedient to his commands, came down, in a fearful storm of rain and wind, to 
destroy the cattle. In an instant the earth, the points of the horizon, and the sky, 
were all blended into one by the heavy and incessant shower. The clouds roared 
aloud, as if in terror of the lightning's scourge, and poured down uninterrupted 
torrents. The whole earth was enveloped in impenetrable darkness by the thick 
and volumed clouds; and above, below, and on every side, the world was water. 
The cattle, pelted by the storm, shrunk cowering into the smallest size, or gave 
up their breath: some covered their calves with their flanks, and some beheld 
their young ones carried away by the flood. The calves, trembling in the wind, 
looked piteously at their mothers, or implored in low moans, as it were, the 
succour of Krishna. Hari, beholding all Gokula agitated with alarm, cowherds, 
cowherdesses, and cattle all in a state of consternation, thus reflected: "This is 
the work of Mahendra, in resentment of the prevention of his sacrifice, and it is 
incumbent on me to defend this station of herdsmen. I will lift up this spacious 
mountain from its stony base, and hold it up, as a large umbrella, over the cow- 
pens." Having thus determined, Krishna immediately plucked up the mountain 
Govarddhana, and held it aloft with one hand in sport, saying to the herdsmen, 
"Lo the mountain is on high; enter beneath it quickly, and it will shelter you from 
the storm: here you will be secure and at your ease in places defended from the 
wind: enter without delay, and fear not that the mountain will fall." Upon this, ah 
the people, with their herds, and their waggons and goods, and the Gopis, 


distressed by the rain, repaired to the shelter of the mountain, which Krishna 
held steadily over their heads; and Krishna, as he supported the mountain, was 
contemplated by the dwellers of Vraja with joy and wonder; and, as their eyes 
opened wide with astonishment and pleasure, the Gopas and Gopis sang his 
praise. For seven days and nights did the vast clouds sent by Indra rain upon the 
Gokula of Nanda to destroy its inhabitants, but they were protected by the 
elevation of the mountain; and the slayer of Bala, Indra, being foiled in his 
purpose, commanded the clouds to cease. The threats of Indra having been 
fruitless, and the heavens clear, all Gokula came forth from its shelter, and 
returned to its own abode. Then Krishna, in the sight of the surprised inhabitants 
of the forests, restored the great mountain Govarddhana to its original site. 


Footnotes 

01. It seems not unlikely that this legend has some reference to the caves or 
cavern temples in various parts of India. A remarkable representation of 
it occurs upon the sculptured rocks of Mahabalipur. It is related much to 
the same purport in the Bhagavata, &c. Sisupala, ridiculing the exploit, 
asserts that Govarddhana was nothing more than an ant hill. 




12. Chapter 


Indra comes to Gokula: praises Krishna, and makes him prince over the cattle. 

Krishna promises to befriend Arjuna. 

AFTER Gokula had been saved by the elevation of the mountain, Indra became 
desirous of beholding Krishna. The conqueror of his foes accordingly mounted 
his vast elephant Airavata, and came to Govarddhana, where the king of the gods 
beheld the mighty Damodara tending cattle, and assuming the person of a cow¬ 
boy, and, although the preserver of the whole world, surrounded by the sons of 
the herdsmen: above his head he saw Garuda, the king of birds, invisible to 
mortals, spreading out his wings to shade the head of Hari. Alighting from his 
elephant, and addressing him apart, Sakra, his eyes expanding with pleasure, 
thus spake to Madhusudana: "Hear, Krishna, the reason why I have come hither; 
why I have approached thee; for thou couldest not otherwise conceive it. Thou, 
who art the supporter of all, hast descended upon earth, to relieve her of her 
burden. In resentment of my obstructed rites I sent the clouds to deluge Gokula, 
and they have done this evil deed. Thou, by raising up the mountain, hast 
preserved the cattle; and of a verity I am much pleased, O hero, with thy 
wondrous deed. The object of the gods is now, methinks, accomplished, since 
with thy single hand thou hast raised aloft this chief of mountains. I have now 
come by desire of the cattle, grateful for their preservation, in order to install you 
as Upendra; and, as the Indra of the cows, thou shalt be called Govinda." Having 
thus said, Mahendra took a ewer from his elephant Airavata, and with the holy 
water it contained performed the regal ceremony of aspersion. The cattle, as the 
rite was celebrating, deluged the earth with their milk. 

When Indra had, by direction of the kine, inaugurated Krishna, the husband of 
Sachi said to him affectionately, "I have thus performed what the cows enjoined 
me. Now, illustrious being, hear what farther I propose, with a view to facilitate 
your task. A portion of me has been born as Arjuna, the son of Pritha: let him 
ever be defended by thee, and he will assist thee in bearing thy burden. He is to 
be cherished by thee, Madhusudana, like another self." To this Krishna replied, 
"I know thy son, who has been born in the race of Bharata, and I will befriend 
him as long as I continue upon earth. As long as I am present, invincible Sakra, 


no one shall be able to subdue Arjuna in fight. When the great demon Kansa has 

/ r 

been slain, and Arishta, Kesin, Kuvalayapida, Naraka, and other fierce Daityas, 
shall have been put to death, there will take place a great war, in which the 
burden of the earth will be removed. Now therefore depart, and be not anxious 
on account of thy son; for no foe shall triumph over Arjuna whilst I am present. 

r 

For his sake I will restore to Kunti all her sons; with Yudhishthira at their head, 
unharmed, when the Bharata war is at an end." 

Upon Krishna's ceasing to speak, he and Indra mutually embraced; and the latter, 
mounting his elephant Airavata, returned to heaven. Krishna, with the cattle and 
the herdsmen, went his way to Vraja, where the wives of the Gopas watched for 
his approach. 




Footnotes 

01. Gobhischa chodita; that is, 'delegated,' says the commentator, 'by the cow 
of plenty, Kamadhenu, and other celestial kine, inhabitants of Goloka, the 
heaven of cows:' but this is evidently unauthorized by the text, as 
celestial cattle could not be grateful for preservation upon earth; and the 
notion of Goloka, a heaven of cows and Krishna, is a modern piece of 
mysticism, drawn from such sectarial works as the Brahma Vaivartta P. 
and Hari Vansa. 

02. The purport of Indra's speech is to explain the meaning of two of 
Krishna's names, Upendra and Govinda. The commentators on the 
Amara Kosha agree in explaining the first, the younger brother of Indra, 
### conformably to the synonyme that immediately follows in the text of 
Amara, Indravaraja; a name that occurs also in the Mahabharata: 
Krishna, as the son of Devaki, who is an incarnation of Aditi, being born 
of the latter subsequently to Indra. Govinda is he who knows, finds, or 
tends cattle; Gam vindati. The Paurariik etymology makes the latter the 
Indra (### quasi ###) of cows; and in this capacity he may well be 
considered as a minor or inferior Indra, such being the proper sense of 
the term Upendra (Upa in composition); as, Upa-puraria, 'a minor 
Puraria,' &c. The proper import of the word Upendra has, however, been 



anxiously distorted by the sectarian followers of Krishna. Thus the 
commentator on our text asserts that Upa is here synonymous with Upari, 
and that Upendratwa, 'the station of Upendra,' means 'rule in the heaven 
of heavens, Goloka;' a new creation of this sect, above Satya-loka, which, 
in the uncorrupt Paurariik system, is the highest of the seven Lokas. So 
the Hari Vansa makes Indra say, 'As thou, Krishna, art appointed, by the 
cows, Indra superior to me, therefore the deities in heaven shall call thee 
Upendra.' The Bhagavata does not introduce the name, though it no 
doubt alludes to it in making the divine cow Surabhi, who is said to have 
come from Goloka with Indra, address Krishna, and say, 'We, instructed 
by Brahma, will crown you as our Indra.' Accordingly Krishna has the 
water of the Ganges thrown over him by the elephant of Indra, and Indra, 
the gods, and sages praise him, and salute him by the appellation of 
Govinda. The Hari Vansa assigns this to Indra alone, who says, 'I am only 
the Indra of the gods; thou hast attained the rank of Indra of the kine, and 
they shall for ever celebrate thee on earth as Govinda.' All this is very 
different from the sober account of our text, and is undoubtedly of 
comparatively recent origin. 




13. Chapter 


Krishna praised by the cowherds: his sports with the Gopis: their imitation and 

love of hire. The Rasa dance. 

AFTER Sakra had departed, the cowherds said to Krishna, whom they had seen 
holding up Govarddhana, "We have been preserved, together with our cattle, 
from a great peril, by your supporting the mountain above us; but this is very 
astonishing child's play, unsuitable to the condition of a herdsman, and all thy 
actions are those of a god. Tell us what is the meaning of all this. Kaliya has 
been conquered in the lake; Pralamba has been killed; Govarddhana has been 
lifted up: our minds are filled with amazement. Assuredly we repose at the feet 
of Hari, O thou of unbounded might! for, having witnessed thy power, we cannot 
believe thee to be a man. Thy affection, Kesava, for our women and children, 
and for Vraja; the deeds that thou hast wrought, which all the gods would have 
attempted in vain; thy boyhood, and thy prowess; thy humiliating birth amongst 
us; are contradictions that fill us with doubt, whenever we think of them. Yet 
reverence be to thee, whether thou be a god, or a demon, or a Yaksha, or a 
Gandharba, or whatever we may deem thee; for thou art our friend." When they 
had ended, Krishna remained silent for some time, as if hurt and offended, and 
then replied to them, "Herdsmen, if you are not ashamed of my relationship; if I 
have merited your praise; what occasion is there for you to engage in any 
discussion concerning me? If you have any regard for me; if I have deserved 
your praise; then be satisfied to know that I am your kinsman. I am neither god, 
nor Yaksha, nor Gandharba, nor Danava; I have been born your relative, and you 
must not think differently of me." Upon receiving this answer, the Gopas held 
their peace, and went into the woods, leaving Krishna apparently displeased. 

But Krishna, observing the clear sky bright with the autumnal moon, and the air 
perfumed with the fragrance of the wild water-lily, in whose buds the clustering 
bees were murmuring their songs, felt inclined to join with the Gopis in sport. 
Accordingly he and Rama commenced singing sweet low strains in various 
measures, such as the women loved; and they, as soon as they heard the melody, 
quitted their homes, and hastened to meet the foe of Madhu. One damsel gently 
sang an accompaniment to his song; another attentively listened to his melody: 


one calling out upon his name, then shrunk abashed; whilst another, more bold, 
and instigated by affection, pressed close to his side: one, as she sallied forth, 
beheld some of the seniors of the family, and dared not venture, contenting 
herself with meditating on Krishna with closed eyes, and entire devotion, by 
which immediately all acts of merit were effaced by rapture, and all sin was 
expiated by regret at not beholding him: and others, again, reflecting upon the 
cause of the world, in the form of the supreme Brahma, obtained by their sighing 
final emancipation. Thus surrounded by the Gopis, Krishna thought the lovely 
moonlight night of autumn propitious to the Rasa dance. Many of the Gopis 
imitated the different actions of Krishna, and in his absence wandered through 
Vrindavan, representing his person. "I am Krishna," cries one; "behold the 
elegance of my movements." "I am Krishna," exclaims another; "listen to my 
song." "Vile Kaliya, stay! for I am Krishna," is repeated by a third, slapping her 
arms in defiance. A fourth calls out, "Herdsmen, fear nothing; be steady; the 
danger of the storm is over, for, lo, I lift up Govarddhana for your shelter." And a 
fifth proclaims, "Now let the herds graze where they will, for I have destroyed 
Dhenuka." Thus in various actions of Krishna the Gopis imitated him, whilst 
away, and beguiled their sorrow by mimicking his sports. Looking down upon 
the ground, one damsel calls to her friend, as the light down upon her body 
stands erect with joy, and the lotuses of her eyes expand, "See here are the marks 
of Krishna's feet, as he has gone alone sportively, and left the impressions of the 
banner, fife thunderbolt, and the goad. What lovely maiden has been his 
companion, inebriate with passion, as her irregular footmarks testify? Here 
Damodara has gathered flowers from on high, for we see alone the impressions 
of the tips of his feet. Here a nymph has sat down with him, ornamented with 
flowers, fortunate in having propitiated Vishnu in a prior existence. Having left 
her in an arrogant mood, because he had offered her flowers, the son of Nanda 
has gone by this road; for see, unable to follow him with equal steps, his 
associate has here tripped along upon her toes, and, holding his hand, the damsel 
has passed, as is evident from the uneven and intermingled footsteps. But the 
rogue has merely taken her hand, and left her neglected, for here the paces 
indicate the path of a person in despair. Undoubtedly he promised that he would 
quickly come again, for here are his own footsteps returning with speed. Here he 
has entered the thick forest, impervious to the rays of the moon, and his steps 
can be traced no farther." Hopeless then of beholding Krishna, the Gopis 
returned, and repaired to the banks of the Yamuna, where they sang his songs; 
and presently they beheld the preserver of the three worlds, with a smiling 



aspect, hastening towards them: on which, one exclaimed, "Krishna! Krishna!" 
unable to articulate any thing else: another affected to contract her forehead with 
frowns, as drinking with the bees of her eyes the lotus of the face of Hari: 
another, closing her eyelids, contemplated internally his form, as if engaged in 
an act of devotion. Then Madhava, coming amongst them, conciliated some with 
soft speeches, some with gentle looks, and some he took by the hand; and the 
illustrious deity sported with them in the stations of the dance. As each of the 
Gopis, however, attempted to keep in one place, close to the side of Krishna, the 
circle of the dance could not be constructed, and he therefore took each by the 
hand, and when their eyelids were shut by the effects of such touch, the circle 
was formed. Then proceeded the dance to the music of their clashing bracelets, 
and songs that celebrated in suitable strain the charms of the autumnal season. 
Krishna sang the moon of autumn, a mine of gentle radiance; but the nymphs 
repeated the praises of Krishna alone. At times, one of them, wearied by the 
revolving dance, threw her arms, ornamented with tinkling bracelets, round the 
neck of the destroyer of Madhu: another, skilled in the art of singing his praises, 
embraced him. The drops of perspiration from the arms of Hari were like 
fertilizing rain, which produced a crop of down upon the temples of the Gopis. 
Krishna sang the strain that was appropriate to the dance. The Gopis repeatedly 
exclaimed, "Bravo, Krishna!" to his song. When leading, they followed him; 
when returning, they encountered him; and, whether he went forwards or 
backwards, they ever attended on his steps. Whilst frolicking thus with the 
Gopis, they considered every instant without him a myriad of years; and, 
prohibited in vain by husbands, fathers, brothers, they went forth at night to sport 
with Krishna, the object of their affection. Thus the illimitable being, the 
benevolent remover of all imperfections, assumed the character of a youth 
amongst the females of the herdsmen of Vraja; pervading their natures, and that 
of their lords, by his own essence, all diffusive like the wind: for even as in all 
creatures the elements of ether, fire, earth, water, and air, are comprehended, so 
also is he every where present, and in all. 


Footnotes 


01. The Rasa dance is danced by men and women, holding each other's 


hands, and going round in a circle, singing the airs to which they dance. 
According to Bharata, the airs are various both in melody and time, and 
the number of persons should not exceed sixty-four. 

02. The soles of the feet of a deity are usually marked by a variety of 
emblematical figures: this is carried to the greatest extravagance by the 
Buddhists, the marks on the feet of Gautama being 130: see Trans. R. As. 
Soc. III. 70. It is a decoration very moderately employed by the Hindus. 

03. This is a rather inexplicit statement, but the comment makes it clear. 
Krishna, it is said, in order to form the circle, takes each damsel by the 
hand, and leads her to her place: there he quits her; but the effect of the 
contact is such, that it deprives her of the power of perception, and she 
contentedly takes the hand of her female neighbour, thinking it to be 
Krishna's. The Bhagavata is bolder, and asserts that Krishna multiplied 
himself, and actually stood between each two damsels: 'The Rasa dance, 
formed of a circle graced by the Gopis, was then led off by the lord of 
magic, Krishna having placed himself in the midst of every two of the 
nymphs.' The Hari Vansa intimates the same, though not very fully: 'Then 
all the nymphs of the cowherds, placing themselves in couples in a row, 
engaged in pleasant diversion, singing the deeds of Krishna.' The Pankti, 
or row, is said by the commentator to mean here, the Mandala, or ring; 
and the couples' to imply that Krishna was between every two. He quotes 
a verse to this effect from some other Vaishriava work: 'Between each 
two damsels was Madhava, and between each two Madhavas was a 
nymph; and the son of Devaki played on the flute:' for, in fact, Krishna is 
not only dancing with each, but also by himself in the centre; for this the 
commentator on the Hari Vansa cites a passage from the Vedas: ###. 
Literally, 'The many-formed (being) assumes (various) bodies. One form 
stood apart, occupying triple observance.' Now if the verse be genuine, it 
probably refers to something that has little to do with Krishna; but it is 
explained to apply to the Rasa; the form of Krishna being supposed to be 
meant, as wholly distinct from the Gopis, and yet being beheld by every 
one of them, on each side and in front of her. In the meditation upon 
Krishna, which is enjoined in the Brahma Vaivartta, he is to be 
contemplated in the centre of the Rasa Mandala, in association with his 
favourite Radha; but the Mandala described in that work is not a ring of 
dancers, but a circle of definite space at Vrindavana, within which 
Krishna, Radha, and the Gopis divert themselves, not very decorously. 



This work has probably given the tone to the style in which the annual 
festival, the Rasa Yatra, is celebrated in various parts of India, in the 
month of Kartika, upon the sun's entrance into Libra, by nocturnal 
dances, and representations of the sports of Krishna. A circular dance of 
men and women, however, does not form any prominent feature at these 
entertainments, and it may be doubted if it is ever performed. Some of 
the earliest labourers in the field of Hindu mythology have thought this 
circular dance to typify the dance of the planets round the sun (Maurice, 
Ancient History of Hindus, I. 108. II. 356); but there is no particular 
number assigned to the performers by any of the Hindu authorities, 
beyond its limitation to sixty-four. At the Rasa Mandala of the Brahma 
Vaivartta, Radha is accompanied by thirty-six of her most particular 
friends amongst the Gopis, but they are each attended by thousands of 
inferior personages, and none of the crowd are left without male 
multiples of Krishna. The only mysticism hinted at in that Puraria, is, that 
these are all one with Krishna: the varied vital conditions of one spirit 
being represented by the Gopis and the illusory manifestations of 
Krishna: he himself being supreme unmodified soul. 




14. Chapter 

r 

Krishna kills the demon Arishta, in the form of a bull. 

ONE evening, whilst Krishna and the Gopis were amusing themselves in the 
dance, the demon Arishta, disguised as a savage bull, came to the spot, after 
having spread alarm through the station. His colour was that of a cloud charged 
with rain; he had vast horns, and his eyes were like two fiery suns: as he moved, 
he ploughed up the ground with his hoofs: his tongue was repeatedly licking his 
lips; his tail was erect; the sinews of his shoulders were firm, and between them 
rose a hump of enormous dimensions; his haunches were soiled with ordure, and 
he was a terror to the herds; his dewlap hung low, and his face was marked with 
scars from butting against the trees. Terrifying all the kine, the demon who 
perpetually haunts the forests in the shape of a bull, destroying hermits and 
ascetics, advanced. Beholding an animal of such a formidable aspect, the 
herdsmen and their women were exceedingly frightened, and called aloud on 
Krishna, who came to their succour, shouting and slapping his arm in defiance. 
When the Daitya heard the noise, he turned upon his challenger, and fixing his 
eyes and pointing his horns at the belly of Kesava, he ran furiously upon the 
youth. Krishna stirred not from his post, but, smiling in sport and derision, 
awaited the near approach of the bull, when he seized him as an alligator would 
have done, and held him firmly by the horns, whilst he pressed his sides with his 
knees. Having thus humbled his pride, and held him captive by his horns, he 
wrung his throat, as if it had been a piece of wet cloth; and then tearing off one 
of the horns, he beat the fierce demon with it until he died, vomiting blood from 
his mouth. Seeing him slain, the herdsmen glorified Krishna, as the companies 
of the celestials of old praised Indra, when he triumphed over the Asura Jambha. 


Footnotes 

01. This exploit is related a little more in detail in the Bhagavata and Hari 
Vansa. 




15. Chapter 


Kansa informed by Narada of the existence of Krishna and Balarama: he sends 
Kesin to destroy them, and Akrura to bring them to Mathura. 

AFTER these things had come to pass, Arishta the bull-demon and Dhenuka and 
Pralamba had been slain, Govarddhana had been lifted up, the serpent Kaliya 
had been subdued, the two trees had been broken, the female fiend Putana had 
been killed, and the waggon had been overturned, Narada went to Kansa, and 
related to him the whole, beginning with the transference of the child from 
Devaki to Yasoda, Hearing this from Narada, Kansa was highly incensed with 
Vasudeva, and bitterly reproached him, and all the Yadavas, in an assembly of 
the tribe. Then reflecting what was to be done, he determined to destroy both 
Krishna and Rama whilst they were yet young, and before they had attained to 
manly vigour: for which purpose he resolved to invite them from Vraja, under 
pretext of the solemn rite of the lustration of arms, when he would engage them 

r 

in a trial of strength with his chief boxers, Chanura and Mushtika, by whom they 
would assuredly be killed. "I will send," he said, "the noble Yadu, Akrura the son 
of Swaphalka, to Gokula, to bring them hither: I will order the fierce Kesin, who 
haunts the woods of Vrindavan, to attack them, and he is of unequalled might, 
and will surely kill them; or, if they arrive here, my elephant Kuvalayapida shall 
trample to death these two cow-boy sons of Vasudeva." Having thus laid his 
plans to destroy Rama and Janarddana, the impious Kansa sent for the heroic 
Akrura, and said to him, "Lord of liberal gifts, attend to my words, and, out of 
friendship for me, perform my orders. Ascend your chariot, and go hence to the 
station of the herdsman Nanda. Two vile boys, portions of Vishnu, have been 
born there, for the express object of effecting my destruction. On the fourteenth 
lunation I have to celebrate the festival of arms, and I wish them to be brought 
here by you, to take part in the games, and that the people may see them engage 

r 

in a boxing match with my two dexterous athletae, Chanura and Mushtika; or 
haply my elephant Kuvalayapida, driven against them by his rider, shall kill 
these two iniquitous youngsters, sons of Vasudeva. When they are out of the 
way, I will put to death Vasudeva himself, the cowherd Nanda, and my foolish 
father, Ugrasena, and I will seize upon the herds and flocks, and all the 
possessions, of the rebellious Gopas, who have ever been my foes. Except thou, 


lord of liberality, all the Yadavas are hostile to me; but I will devise schemes for 
their extirpation, and I shall then reign over my kingdom, in concert with thee, 
without any annoyance. Through regard for me, therefore, do thou go as I direct 
thee; and thou shalt command the cowherds to bring in with speed their supplies 
of milk and butter and curds." 

Being thus instructed, the illustrious Akrura readily undertook to visit Krishna, 
and, ascending his stately chariot, he went forth from the city of Mathura. 


Footnotes 

01. Danapati: the epithet refers to Akrura's possession of the Syamantaka 
gem although, as here used by Kansa, it is an anachronism, the gem not 
becoming his until after Krishna's maturity. 

02. Dhanurmaha: the same phrase occurs in the different authorities. In its 
ordinary acceptation it would imply any military festival. There is one of 
great celebrity, which, in the south of India, closes the Dasahara, or 
festival of Durga, when military exercises are performed, and a field is 
ravaged, as typical of the opening of a campaign. Worship is paid to 
military implements. The proper day for this is the Vijaya dasami, or 
tenth of the light half of Aswin, falling about the end of September or 
beginning of October. Trans. Bombay Soc. III. 73; also Amara Kosha, 
under the word ### (Lohabhisara). Both our text and that of the 
Bhagavata, however, intimate the celebration of the feast in question on 
the fourteenth day of the fortnight (in what month is not specified), and 
an occasional 'passage of arms,' therefore is all that is intended. The 
fourteenth day of the light lunation of any month is commonly held 
appropriate for a holiday, or religious rite. It will be seen in the sequel, 
that the leading feature of the ceremonial was intended to have been a 
trial of archery, spoiled by Krishna's breaking the bow that was to have 
been used on the occasion. 





16. Chapter 


Kesin, in the form of a horse, slain by Krishna: he is praised by Narada. 

KESIN, confiding in his prowess, having received the commands of Kansa, set 
off to the woods of Vrindavana, with the intention of destroying Krishna. He 
came in the shape of a steed, spurning the earth with his hoofs, scattering the 
clouds with his mane, and springing in his paces beyond the orbits of the sun and 
moon. The cowherds and their females, hearing his neighings, were struck with 
terror, and fled to Govinda for protection, calling upon him to save them. In a 
voice deep as the roaring of the thundercloud, Krishna replied to them, "Away 
with these fears of Kesin; is the valour of a hero annihilated by your alarms? 
What is there to apprehend from one of such little might, whose neighings are 
his only terrors; a galloping and vicious steed, who is ridden by the strength of 
the Daityas? Come on, wretch—I am Krishna—and I will knock all thy teeth 
down thy throat, as the wielder of the trident did to Pushan." Thus defying him 
to combat, Govinda went to encounter Kesin. The demon ran upon him, with his 
mouth opened wide; but Krishna enlarging the bulk of his arm, thrust it into his 
mouth, and wrenched out the teeth, which fell from his jaws like fragments of 
white clouds. Still the arm of Krishna, in the throat of the demon, continued to 
enlarge, like a malady increasing from its commencement till it ends in 
dissolution. From his torn lips the demon vomited foam and blood; his eyes 
rolled in agony; his joints gave way; he beat the earth with his feet; his body was 
covered with perspiration; he became incapable of any effort. The formidable 
demon, having his mouth rent open by the arm of Krishna, fell down, torn 
asunder like a tree struck by lightning: he lay separated into two portions, each 
having two legs, half a back, half a tail, one ear, one eye, and one nostril. 
Krishna stood, unharmed and smiling, after the destruction of the demon, 
surrounded by the cowherds, who, together with their women, were filled with 
astonishment at the death of Kesin, and glorified the amiable god with the lotus 
eyes. Narada the Brahman, invisible, seated in a cloud, beheld the fall of Kesin, 
and delightedly exclaimed, "Well done, lord of the universe, who in thy sports 
hast destroyed Kesin, the oppressor of the denizens of heaven! Curious to behold 
this great combat between a man and a horse—such a one as was never before 
heard of—I have come from heaven. Wonderful are the works that thou hast 


done, in thy descent upon the earth! they have excited my astonishment; but this, 
above all, has given me pleasure. Indra and the gods lived in dread of this horse, 
who tossed his mane, and neighed, and looked down upon the clouds. For this, 
that thou hast slain the impious Kesin, thou shalt be known in the world by the 
name of Kesava. Farewell: I will now depart. I shall meet thee again, conqueror 
of Kesin, in two days more, in conflict with Kansa. When the son of Ugrasena, 
with his followers, shall have been slain, then, upholder of the earth, will earth's 
burdens have been lightened by thee. Many are the battles of the kings that I 
have to see, in which thou shalt be renowned. I will now depart, Govinda. A 
great deed, and acceptable to the gods, has been done by thee. I have been much 
delighted with thee, and now take my leave." When Narada had gone, Krishna, 
not in any way surprised, returned with the Gopas to Gokula; the sole object of 
the eyes of the women of Vraja. 




Footnotes 

01. As Virabhadra did to Pusha or Pushan, a form of Surya, at the sacrifice of 
Daksha. 

02. Or Kesi and va, 'who kills,' from vadh or badh, 'to kill:' but this is a 
Pauranik etymology, and less satisfactory than the usual grammatical one 
of Kesa, 'hair,' and 'va' possessive affix: Krishna corresponding in this 
respect to the Apollo Crinitus. It is also derived from the legend of his 
origin from 'a hair' and again, Kesa is said to purport 'radiance' or 'rays,' 
whether of the sun or moon or fire; all which are the light of Krishna: 
whence he is called Kesava, 'the rayed' or 'radiant.' Mahabharata, Moksha 
Dharma. 

03. The legend is told by all the other narrators of Krishna's juvenile exploits. 




17. Chapter 


Akrura's meditations on Krishna: his arrival at Gokula: his delight at seeing 

Krishna and his brother. 

AKRURA, having set off in his quick travelling car, proceeded to visit Krishna 
at the pastures of Nanda; and, as he went along, he congratulated himself on his 
superior good fortune, in having an opportunity of beholding a descended 
portion of the deity. "Now," thought he, "has my life borne fruit; my night is 
followed by the dawn of day; since I shall see the countenance of Vishnu, whose 
eyes are like the expanded leaf of the lotus. I shall behold that lotus-eyed aspect 
of Vishnu, which, when seen only in imagination, takes away the sins of men. I 
shall to-day behold that glory of glories, the mouth of Vishnu, whence proceeded 
the Vedas, and all their dependant sciences. I shall see the sovereign of the 
world, by whom the world is sustained; who is worshipped as the best of males, 
as the male of sacrifice in sacrificial rites. I shall see Kesava, who is without 
beginning or end; by worshipping whom with a hundred sacrifices, Indra 
obtained the sovereignty over the gods. That Hari, whose nature is unknown to 
Brahma, Indra, Rudra, the Aswins, the Vasus, Adityas, and Maruts, will this day 
touch my body. The soul of all, the knower of all, he who is all, and is present in 
all, he who is permanent, undecaying, all-pervading, will converse with me. He, 
the unborn, who has preserved the world in the various forms of a fish, a 
tortoise, a boar, a horse, a lion, will this day speak to me. Now the lord of the 
earth, who assumes shapes at will, has taken upon him the condition of 
humanity, to accomplish some object cherished in his heart. That Ananta, who 
holds the earth upon his crest, and who has descended upon earth for its 
protection, will this day call me by my name. Glory to that being, whose 
deceptive adoption of father, son, brother, friend, mother, and relative, the world 
is unable to penetrate. Glory to him, who is one with true knowledge, who is 
inscrutable, and through whom, seated in his heart, the Yogi crosses the wide 
expanse of worldly ignorance and illusion. I bow to him, who, by the performers 
of holy rites, is called the male of sacrifice (Yajnapurusha); by pious worshippers 
is termed Vasudeva; and by the cultivators of philosophy, Vishnu. May he in 
whom cause and effect, and the world itself, is comprehended, be propitious to 
me, through his truth; for always do I put my trust in that unborn, eternal Hari; 


by meditation on whom, man becomes the repository of all good things." 

His mind thus animated by devout faith, and meditating in this manner, Akrura 
proceeded on his road, and arrived at Gokula a little before sunset, at the time of 
the milking of the cows; and there he saw Krishna amongst the cattle, dark as the 
leaf of the full blown lotus; his eyes of the same colour, and his breast decorated 
with the Srivatsa mark; long armed, and broad chested; having a high nose, and a 
lovely countenance, brightened with mirthful smiles; treading firmly on the 
ground, with feet whose nails were tinted red; clad in yellow garments, and 
adorned with a garland of forest flowers; having a fresh-gathered creeper in his 
hand, and a chaplet of white lotus flowers on his head. Akrura also beheld there 
Balabhadra, white as a jasmine, a swan, or the moon, and dressed in blue 
raiment; having large and powerful arms, and a countenance as radiant as a lotus 
in bloom; like another Kailasa mountain, crested with a wreath of clouds. 

When Akrura saw these two youths, his countenance expanded with delight, and 
the down of his body stood erect with pleasure: for this he thought to be supreme 
happiness and glory; this, the double manifestation of the divine Vasudeva; this 
was the twofold gratification of his sight, to behold the creator of the universe: 
now he hoped that his bodily form would yield fruit, as it would bring him in 
contact with the person of Krishna; and that the wearer of infinite forms would 
place his hand on his back; the touch of whose finger alone is sufficient to dispel 
sin, and to secure imperishable felicity: that hand which launches the fierce 
irresistible discus, blazing with all the flames of fire, lightning, and the sun, and 
slaughtering the demon host washes the collyrium from the eyes of their brides: 
that hand into which Bali poured water, and thence obtained ineffable 
enjoyments below the earth, and immortality and dominion over the gods for a 
whole Manwantara, without peril from a foe. "Alas! he will despise me, for my 
connexion with Kansa, an associate with evil, though not contaminated by it. 
How vain is his birth, who is shunned by the virtuous? and yet what is there in 
this world unknown to him who resides in the hearts of all men, who is ever 
existent, exempt from imperfection, the aggregate of the quality of purity, and 
identical with true knowledge? With a heart wholly devoted to him, then, I will 
approach the lord of all lords, the descended portion of Purushottama, of Vishnu, 
who is without beginning, middle, or end." 





Footnotes 


01. The commentator explains this to mean Hayagriva, or Vishnu with the 
neck and head of a horse; who, it is said in the second book of the 
Bhagavata, appeared at the end of a great sacrifice performed by Brahma, 
and breathed from his nostrils the texts of the Vedas. The fourth Avatara 
is always elsewhere said to be the Vamana, or dwarf. 




18. Chapter 


Grief of the Gopis on the departure of Krishna and Balarama with Akrura: their 
leaving Gokula. Akrura bathes in the Yamuna; beholds the divine forms of the 
two youths, and praises Vishnu. 

THUS meditating, the Yadava approached Govinda, and addressed him, and 
said, "I am Akrura," and bowed his head down to the feet of Hari; but Krishna 
laid upon him his hand, which was marked with the flag, the thunderbolt, and the 
lotus, and drew him towards him, and affectionately embraced him. Then 
Kesava and Rama entered into conversation with him, and, having heard from 
him all that had occurred, were much pleased, and led him to their habitation: 
there they resumed their discourse, and gave him food to eat, and treated him 
with proper hospitality. Akrura told them how their father Anakadundubhi, the 
princess Devaki, and even his own father, Ugrasena, had been insulted by the 
iniquitous demon Kansa: he also related to them the purpose for which he had 
been dispatched. When he had told them all these things, the destroyer of Kesin 
said to him, "I was aware of all that you have told me, lord of liberal gifts: Rama 
and I will go to-morrow to Mathura along with you. The elders of the cowherds 
shall accompany us, bearing ample offerings. Rest here to-night, and dismiss all 
anxiety. Within three nights I will slay Kansa and his adherents." 

Having given orders accordingly to the cowherds, Akrura, with Kesava and 
Rama, retired to rest, and slept soundly in the dwelling of Nanda. The next 
morning was bright, and the youths prepared to depart for Mathura with Akrura. 
The Gopis, seeing them about to set forth, were much afflicted; they wept 
bitterly, their bracelets were loose upon their arms, and they thus communed 
together: "If Govinda depart for Mathura, how will he return to Gokula? his ears 
will there be regaled with the melodious and polished conversation of the 
women of the city. Accustomed to the language of the graceful females of 
Mathura, he will never again endure the rustic expressions of the Gopis. Hari, 
the pride of the station, is carried off, and a fatal blow is inflicted upon us by 
inexorable destiny, Expressive smiles, soft language, graceful airs, elegant gait, 
and significant glances, belong to the women of the city. Hari is of rustic 
breeding, and, captivated by their fascinations, what likelihood is there of his 


returning to the society of any one amongst us? Kesava, who has mounted the 
car to go to Mathura, has been deceived by the cruel, vile, and desperate Akrura. 
Does not the unfeeling traitor know the affection that we all here feel for our 
Hari, the joy of our eyes, that he is taking him away? Unkind that he is, Govinda 
is departing from us, along with Rama: haste! let us stop him! Why talk of 
telling our seniors that we cannot bear his loss? What can they do for us, when 
we are consumed by the fires of separation? The Gopas, with Nanda at their 
head, are themselves preparing to depart; no one makes any attempt to detain 
Govinda. Bright is the morning that succeeds to this night for the women of 
Mathura, for the bees of their eyes will feed upon the lotus face of Achyuta. 
Happy are they who may go hence without impediment, and behold, enraptured, 
Krishna on his journey. A great festival will give pleasure to-day to the eyes of 
the inhabitants of Mathura, when they see the person of Govinda. What a blissful 
vision will be seen by the happy women, of the city, whose brilliant eyes shall 
regard, unchecked, the countenance of Krishna! Alas! the eyes of the Gopis have 
been deprived of sight by the relentless Brahma, after he had shewn them this 
great treasure. In proportion as the affection of Hari for us decays, so do our 
limbs wither, and the bracelets slip from our arms: and now the cruel Akrura 
urges on the horses: all conspire to treat unhappy females with unkindness. Alas! 
alas! we see now only the dust of his chariot wheels! and now he is far away, for 
even that dust is no longer to be seen!" Thus lamented by the women, Kesava 
and Rama quitted the district of Vraja. Travelling in a car drawn by fleet horses, 
they arrived at noon at the banks of the Yamuna, when Akrura requested them to 
halt a little, whilst he performed the usual daily ceremonial in the river. 
Accordingly the intelligent Akrura bathed, and rinsed his mouth, and then 
entering the stream, he stood meditating upon the supreme being; but he beheld 
mentally Balabhadra, having a thousand hooded beads, a garland of Jasmine 
flowers, and large red eyes, attended by Vasuki, Rambha, and other mighty 
serpents, praised by the Gandharbas, decorated with wild flowers, wearing dark 
coloured garments, crowned with a chaplet of lotuses, ornamented with brilliant 
earrings, inebriate, and standing at the bottom of the river in the water. On his 
lap he also beheld, at his ease, Krishna, of the complexion of a cloud, with full 
and coppery eyes, having an elegant form, and four hands, armed with the discus 
and other weapons, wearing yellow clothes, decorated with many coloured 
flowers, and appearing like a cloud embellished with streams of lightning and 
the bow of Indra; his breast was marked with the celestial sign, his arms were 
radiant with bracelets, a diadem shone on his brow, and he wore a white lotus for 



his crest: he was attended by Sanandana and other holy sages, who, fixing their 
eyes upon the tips of their noses, were absorbed in profound meditation. 

When Akrura beheld Balarama and Krishna in this situation, he was much 
amazed, and wondered how they could so quickly have got there from the 
chariot. He wished to ask them this, but Janarddana deprived him of the faculty 
of speech at the moment. Ascending then from the water, he repaired to the car, 
and there he found them both quietly seated in the same human persons as 
before. Plunging again into the water, there he again beheld them, hymned as 
before by the Gandharbas, saints, sages, and serpents. Apprehending, therefore, 
their real character, he thus eulogized the eternal deity, who consists of true 
knowledge:— 

"Salutation to thee, who art uniform and manifold, all-pervading, supreme spirit, 
of inconceivable glory, and who art simple existence. Salutation to thee, O 
inscrutable, who art truth, and the essence of oblations. Salutation to thee, O 
lord, whose nature is unknown, who art beyond primeval matter, who existest in 
five forms, as one with the elements, with the faculties, with matter, with the 
living soul, with supreme spirit. Shew favour to me, O soul of the universe, 
essence of all things, perishable or eternal, whether addressed by the designation 
of Brahma, Vishnu, Siva, or the like. I adore thee, O god, whose nature is 
indescribable, whose purposes are inscrutable, whose name even is unknown; for 
the attributes of kind or appellation are not applicable to thee, who art THAT, the 
supreme Brahma, eternal, unchangeable, untreated. But as the accomplishment 
of our objects cannot be attained except through some specific form, thou art 
termed by us Krishna, Achyuta, Ananta, or Vishnu. Thou, unborn divinity, art all 
the objects of these impersonations; thou art the gods, and all other beings; thou 
art the whole world; thou art all. Soul of the universe, thou art exempt from 
change, and there is nothing except thee in all this existence. Thou art Brahma, 
Pasupati, Aryaman, Dhatri, and Vidhatri; thou art Indra, air, fire, the regent of 
the waters, the god of wealth, and judge of the dead; and thou, although but one, 
presidest over the world with various energies, addressed to various purposes. 
Thou, identical with the solar ray, createst the universe; all elementary substance 
is composed of thy qualities; and thy supreme form is denoted by the 
imperishable term SAT (existence). To him who is one with true knowledge, 
who is and is not perceptible, I bow. Glory be to him, the lord Vasudeva, to 
Sankarsharia, to Pradyumna, and to Aniruddha." 





Footnotes 

01. In the Bhagavata, Hari Vansa, &c. several adventures of Krishna, during 
his residence at Vraja, are recorded, of which our text makes no mention. 
Of these, the two most popular are Krishna's taking away the clothes of 
the Gopis whilst bathing, and his liberating the Gopas from the mouth of 
Aghasura, disguised as a vast serpent, into which they had entered, 
thinking it a cavern in a mountain. The omission of these two legends, or 
of any of the rest, is not much to be regretted. 

02. The noonday prayer, or Sandhya. 

03. By his Dhyana, or force of meditation, in which it is attempted to bring 
before the mind's eye some definite form of the object of adoration. In 
this case Akrura is compelled to see a form he did not anticipate. The 
Hari Vansa very clumsily sets him to meditate upon the serpent Sesha, 
which spoils the story, intended as that is to exhibit the identity of 
Balarama and Krishna with the supreme. 

04. Balarama was thus visible in his real character of Sesha, the chief of 
serpents, the couch of Vishnu, and supporter of the world. 

05. Or rather, he beheld Ghanasyama, an appellation of Krishna, who is so 
called from being as black (syama) as a cloud (ghana). 

06. Tad, 'that;' all that is, or that can be conceived. 

07. Akrura's piety is here prophetic; the son and grandson of Krishna are not 
yet born: but this is the Vaishriava style of addressing Krishna or Vishnu, 
as identical with four Vyuhas, 'arrangements' or 'dispositions,' Krishna, 
Balarama, Pradyumna, and Aniruddha. See As. Res. XVI. 35. In this, as 
in several other places, the Vishnu P. differs from some of the other 
narratives of Krishna, by the length and character of the prayers 
addressed to Vishnu. The Hari Vansa, for instance, here has no prayer or 
panegyric at all: the Bhagavata inserts one. 




19. Chapter 


Akrura conveys Krishna and Rama near to Mathura, and leaves them: they enter 
the town. Insolence of Kansa's washerman: Krishna kills him. Civility of a 
flower-seller: Krishna gives him his benediction. 

THUS the Yadava Akrura, standing in the river, praised Krishna, and 
worshipped him with imaginary incense and flowers. Disregarding all other 
objects, he fixed his whole mind upon the deity; and having continued for a long 
time in spiritual contemplation, he at last desisted from his abstraction, 
conceiving he had effected the purposes of soul. Coming up from the water of 
the Yamuna, he went to the car, and there he beheld Rama and Krishna seated as 
before. As his looks denoted surprise, Krishna said to him, "Surely, Akrura, you 
have seen some marvel in the stream of the Yamuna, for your eyes are staring as 
if with astonishment." Akrura replied, "The marvel that I have seen in the stream 
of the Yamuna I behold before me, even here, in a bodily shape; for he whom I 
have encountered in the water, Krishna, is also your wondrous self, of whose 
illustrious person the whole world is the miraculous developement. But enough 
of this; let us proceed to Mathura: I am afraid Kansa will be angry at our delay; 
such is the wretched consequence of eating the bread of another." Thus speaking, 
he urged on the quick horses, and they arrived after sunset at Mathura. When 
they came in sight of the city, Akrura said to Krishna and Rama, "You must now 
journey on foot, whilst I proceed alone in the car; and you must not go to the 
house of Vasudeva, for the elder has been banished by Kansa on your account." 

Akrura having thus spoken, left them, and entered the city; whilst Rama and 
Krishna continued to walk along the royal road. Regarded with pleasure by men 
and women, they went along sportively, looking like two young elephants. As 
they roamed about, they saw a washerman colouring clothes, and with smiling 
countenances they went and threw down some of his fine linen. The washerman 
was the servant of Kansa, made insolent by his master's favour; and he provoked 
the two lads with loud and scurrilous abuse, until Krishna struck him down, with 
his head to the ground, and killed him. Then taking the clothes, they went their 
way, clad in yellow and blue raiment, until they came to a flower-seller's shop. 
The flower-seller looked at them with astonishment, and wondered who they 


could be, or whence they could have come. Seeing two youths so lovely, dressed 
in yellow and blue garments, he imagined them to be divinities descended upon 
earth. Being addressed by them with mouths budding like lotuses, and asked for 
some flowers, he placed his hands upon the ground, and touched it with his head, 
saying, "My lords have shewn me great kindness in coming to my house, 
fortunate that I am; I will pay them homage." Having thus spoken, the flower- 
seller, with a smiling aspect, gave them whatever choice flowers they selected, to 
conciliate their favour. Repeatedly prostrating himself before them, he presented 
them with flowers, beautiful, fragrant, and fresh. Krishna then, being much 
pleased with him, gave him this blessing; "Fortune, good friend, who depends 
upon me, shall never forsake you: never shall you suffer loss of vigour, or loss of 
wealth: as long as time shall last your descendants shall not fail. Having long 
tasted various delights on earth, you shah finally obtain, by calling me to 
recollection, a heavenly region, the consequence of my favour. Your heart shall 
ever be intent on righteousness, and fulness of days shall be the portion of your 
posterity. Your descendants shah not be subject to natural infirmities, as long as 
the sun shall endure." Having thus spoken, Krishna and Rama, worshipped by 
the flower-seller, went forth from his dwelling. 


Footnotes 

01. These incidents are told, with some unimportant differences, in the other 
accounts of Krishna's youth. 




20. Chapter 


Krishna and Balarama meet Kubja; she is made straight by the former: they 
proceed to the palace. Krishna breaks a bow intended for a trial of arms. Kansa's 
orders to his servants. Public games. Krishna and his brother enter the arena: the 

r 

former wrestles with Chanura, the latter with Mushtika, the king's wrestlers; who 
are both killed. Krishna attacks and slays Kansa: he and Balarama do homage to 
Vasudeva and Devaki: the former praises Krishna. 

As they proceeded along the high road, they saw coming towards them a young 
girl, who was crooked, carrying a pot of unguent. Krishna addressed her 
sportively, and said, "For whom are you carrying that unguent? tell me, lovely 
maiden; tell me truly." Spoken to as it were through affection, Kubja, well 
disposed towards Hari, replied to him also mirthfully, being smitten by his 
appearance; "Know you not, beloved, that I am the servant of Kansa, and 
appointed, crooked as I am, to prepare his perfumes. Unguent ground by any 
other he does not approve of: hence I am enriched through his liberal rewards." 
Then said Krishna, "Fair-faced damsel, give us of this unguent, fragrant and fit 
for kings, as much as we may rub upon our bodies." "Take it," answered Kubja.; 
and she gave them as much of the unguent as was sufficient for their persons; 
and they rubbed it on various parts of their faces and bodies, till they looked like 
two clouds, one white and one black, decorated by the many-tinted bow of Indra. 
Then Krishna, skilled in the curative art, took hold of her, under the chin, with 
the thumb and two fingers, and lifted up her head, whilst with his feet he pressed 
down her feet; and in this way he made her straight. When she was thus relieved 
from her deformity, she was a most beautiful woman; and, filled with gratitude 
and affection, she took Govinda by the garment, and invited him to her house. 
Promising to come at some other time, Krishna smilingly dismissed her, and then 
laughed aloud on beholding the countenance of Baladeva. 

Dressed in blue and yellow garments, and anointed with fragrant unguents, 
Kesava and Rama proceeded to the hall of arms, which was hung round with 
garlands. Inquiring of the warders which bow he was to try, and being directed to 
it, he took it, and bent it; but drawing it with violence, he snapped it in two, and 
all Mathura resounded with the noise which its fracture occasioned. Abused by 


the warders for breaking the bow, Krishna and Rama retorted, and defied them, 
and left the hall. 

When Kansa knew that Akrura had returned, and heard that the bow had been 
broken, he thus said to Chanura and Mushtika, his boxers: "Two youths, 
cowherd boys, have arrived; you must kill them both, in a trial of strength, in my 
presence; for they practise against my life. I shall be well pleased if you kill 
them in the match, and will give you whatever you wish; not else. These two 
foes of mine must be killed by you fairly or unfairly. The kingdom shall be ours 
in common, when they have perished." Having given them these orders, he sent 
next for his elephant driver, and desired him to station his great elephant 
Kuvalayapida, who was as vast as a cloud charged with rain, near the gate of the 
arena, and drive him upon the two boys when they should attempt to enter. When 
Kansa had issued these commands, and ascertained that the platforms were all 
ready for the spectators, he awaited the rising of the sun, unconscious of 
impending death. 

In the morning the citizens assembled on the platforms set apart for them, and 
the princes, with the ministers and courtiers, occupied the royal seats. Near the 
centre of the circle judges of the games were stationed by Kansa, whilst he 
himself sat apart close by upon a lofty throne. Separate platforms were erected 
for the ladies of the palace, for the courtesans, and for the wives of the citizens. 
Nanda and the cowherds had places appropriated to them, at the end of which sat 
Akrura and Vasudeva. Amongst the wives of the citizens appeared Devaki, 
mourning for her son, whose lovely face she longed to behold even in the hour 
of his destruction. When the musical instruments sounded, Chanura sprang forth, 

r 

and the people cried, "Alas!" and Mushtika slapped his arms in defiance. 
Covered with must and blood from the elephant, whom, when goaded upon them 
by his driver, they had slain, and armed with his tusks, Balabhadra and 
Janarddana confidently entered the arena, like two lions amidst a herd of deer. 
Exclamations of pity arose from all the spectators, along with expressions of 
astonishment. "This then," said the people, "is Krishna! this is Balabhadra! This 
is he by whom the fierce night-walker Putana was slain; by whom the waggon 
was overturned, and the two Arjuna trees felled! This is the boy who trampled 
and danced on the serpent Kaliya; who upheld the mountain Govarddhana for 

r 

seven nights; who killed, as if in play, the iniquitous Arishta, Dhenuka, and 
Kesin! This whom we see is Achyuta! This is he who has been foretold by the 



wise, skilled in the sense of the Puranas, as Gopala, who shall exalt the 
depressed Yadava race! This is a portion of the all-existing, all-generating 
Vishnu, descended upon earth, who will assuredly lighten her load!" Thus did 
the citizens describe Rama and Krishna, as soon as they appeared; whilst the 
breast of Devaki glowed with maternal affection; and Vasudeva, forgetting his 
infirmities, felt himself young again, on beholding the countenances of his sons 
as a season of rejoicing. The women of the palace, and the wives of the citizens, 
wide opened their eyes, and gazed intently upon Krishna. "Look, friends," said 
they to their companions; "look at the face of Krishna; his eyes are reddened by 
his conflict with the elephant, and the drops of perspiration stand upon his 
cheeks, outvieing a full blown lotus in autumn, studded with glittering dew. 
Avail yourself now of the faculty of vision. Observe his breast, the seat of 
splendour, marked with the mystic sign; and his arms, menacing destruction to 
his foes. Do you not notice Balabhadra, dressed in a blue garment; his 
countenance as fair as the jasmine, as the moon, as the fibres of the lotus stem? 

r 

See how he gently smiles at the gestures of Mushtika and Chanura, as they 
spring up. And now behold Hari advance to encounter Chanura. What! are there 
no elders, judges of the field? How can the delicate form of Hari, only yet in the 
dawn of adolescence, be regarded as a match for the vast and adamantine bulk of 
the great demon? Two youths, of light and elegant persons, are in the arena, to 
oppose athletic fiends, headed by the cruel Chanura. This is a great sin in the 
judges of the games, for the umpires to suffer a contest between boys and strong 
men." 

As thus the women of the city conversed with one another, Hari, having 
tightened his girdle, danced in the ring, shaking the ground on which he trod. 
Balabhadra also danced, slapping his arms in defiance. Where the ground was 
firm, the invincible Krishna contended foot to foot with Chanura. The practised 
demon Mushtika was opposed by Balabhadra. Mutually entwining, and pushing, 
and pulling, and beating each other with fists, arms, and elbows, pressing each 
other with their knees, interlacing their arms, kicking with their feet, pressing 
with their whole weight upon one another, fought Hari and Chanura. Desperate 
was the struggle, though without weapons, and one for life and death, to the 
great gratification of the spectators. In proportion as the contest continued, so 
Chanura was gradually losing something of his original vigour, and the wreath 
upon his head trembled from his fury and distress whilst the world- 
comprehending Krishna wrestled with him as if but in sport. Beholding Chanura 



losing, and Krishna gaining strength, Kansa, furious with rage, commanded the 
music to cease. As soon as the drums and trumpets were silenced, a numerous 
band of heavenly instruments was heard in the sky, and the gods invisibly 
exclaimed, "Victory to Govinda! Kesava, kill the demon Chanura!" 
Madhusudana having for a long time dallied with his adversary, at last lifted him 
up, and whirled him round, with the intention of putting an end to him. Having 
whirled Chanura round a hundred times, until his breath was expended in the air, 
Krishna dashed him on the ground with such violence as to smash his body into 
a hundred fragments, and strew the earth with a hundred pools of gory mire. 
Whilst this took place, the mighty Baladeva was engaged in the same manner 
with the demon bruiser Mushtika. Striking him on the head with his fists, and on 
the breast with his knees, he stretched him on the ground, and pummelled him 
there till he was dead. Again, Krishna encountered the royal bruiser Tomalaka, 
and felled him to the earth with a blow of his left hand. When the other athletae 
saw Chanura, Mushtika, and Tomalaka killed, they fled from the field; and 
Krishna and Sankarsharia danced victorious on the arena, dragging along with 
them by force the cowherds of their own age. Kansa, his eyes reddening with 
wrath, called aloud to the surrounding people, "Drive those two cow-boys out of 
the assembly: seize the villain Nanda, and secure him with chains of iron: put 
Vasudeva to death with tortures intolerable to his years: and lay hands upon the 
cattle, and whatever else belongs to those cowherds who are the associates of 
Krishna." 

Upon hearing these orders, the destroyer of Madhu laughed at Kansa, and, 
springing up to the place where he was seated, laid hold of him by the hair of his 
head, and struck his tiara to the ground: then casting him down upon the earth, 
Govinda threw himself upon him. Crushed by the weight of the upholder of the 
universe, the son of Ugrasena, Kansa the king, gave up the ghost. Krishna then 
dragged the dead body, by the hair of the head, into the centre of the arena, and a 
deep furrow was made by the vast and heavy carcass of Kansa, when it was 
dragged along the ground by Krishna, as if a torrent of water had run through it. 
Seeing Kansa thus treated, his brother Sumalin came to his succour; but he was 
encountered, and easily killed, by Balabhadra. Then arose a general cry of grief 
from the surrounding circle, as they beheld the king of Mathura thus slain, and 
treated with such contumely, by Krishna. Krishna, accompanied by Balabhadra, 
embraced the feet of Vasudeva and of Devaki; but Vasudeva raised him up; and 
he and Devaki recalling to recollection what he had said to them at his birth, they 



bowed to Janarddana, and the former thus addressed him: "Have compassion 
upon mortals, O god, benefactor and lord of deities: it is by thy favour to us two 
that thou hast become the (present) upholder of the world. That, for the 
punishment of the rebellious, thou hast descended upon earth in my house, 
having been propitiated by my prayers, sanctifies our race. Thou art the heart of 
all creatures; thou abidest in all creatures; and all that has been, or will be, 
emanates from thee, O universal spirit! Thou, Achyuta, who comprehendest all 
the gods, art eternally worshipped with sacrifices: thou art sacrifice itself, and 
the offerer of sacrifices. The affection that inspires my heart and the heart of 
Devaki towards thee, as if thou wast our child, is indeed but error, and a great 
delusion. How shall the tongue of a mortal such as I am call the creator of all 
things, who is without beginning or end, son? Is it consistent that the lord of the 
world, from whom the world proceeds, should be born of me, except through 
illusion? How should he, in whom all fixed and moveable things are contained, 
be conceived in the womb and born of a mortal being? Have compassion 
therefore indeed, O supreme lord, and in thy descended portions protect the 
universe. Thou art no son of mine. This whole world, from Brahma to a tree, 
thou art. Wherefore dost thou, who art one with the supreme, beguile us? 
Blinded by delusion, I thought thee my son; and for thee, who art beyond all 
fear, I dreaded the anger of Kansa, and therefore did I take thee in my terror to 
Gokula, where thou hast grown up; but I no longer claim thee as mine own. 
Thou, Vishnu, the sovereign lord of all, whose actions Rudra, the Maruts, the 
Aswins, Indra, and the gods, cannot equal, although they behold them; thou who 
hast come amongst us for the benefit of the world, art recognised, and delusion is 
no more." 




Footnotes 

01. They had their bodies smeared in the style called Bhaktichheda; that is, 
with the separating or distinguishing (chheda) marks of Vaishriava 
devotion (bhakti): certain streaks on the forehead, nose, cheeks, breast, 
and arms, which denote a follower of Vishnu. See As. Res. XVI. 33. 

02. The story is similarly told in the Bhagavata, &c. 

03. The bending or breaking of a bow is a favourite incident in Hindu heroic 


poetry, borrowed, no doubt, from the Ramayaria, where, however, it has 
an object; here it is quite gratuitous. 

04. The Bhagavata enters into even fewer particulars than our text of the 
place set apart for the games. The Hari Vansa gives a much more detailed 
description, which is in some respects curious. The want of any technical 
glossary, and the general manner in which technical terms are explained 
in the ordinary dictionaries, render it difficult to understand exactly what 
is intended, and any translation of the passages must be defective. The 
French version, however, probably represents a much more splendid and 
theatrical scene than the text authorizes, and may therefore admit of 
correction. The general plan is nothing more than an enclosed space, 
surrounded by temporary structures of timber or bambus, open or 
enclosed, and decorated with hangings and garlands. It may be doubted if 
the details described by the compiler of the Hari Vansa were very 
familiar even to him; for his description is not always very consistent or 
precise. Of two commentators, one evidently knows nothing of what he 
attempts to explain; but with the assistance of the other the passages may 
be thus, though not always confidently, rendered:— 

"The king, Kansa, meditating on these things, went forth from his palace 
to the place which had been prepared for the sight of the ceremonial (1), 
to inspect the scaffolds (2) which had been constructed. He found the 
place close set with the several platforms (3) of the different public 
bodies (4), strongly put together, and decorated with roofed pavilions of 
various sizes, supported by columns, and divided into commodious 
chambers (5). The edifice was extensive, well arranged, secured by 
strong rafters (6), spacious and lofty, and commodious and secure. Stairs 
led to the different galleries (7). Chairs of state (8) were placed in various 
parts of it. The avenues that conducted to it were narrow (9). It was 
covered with temporary stages and sheds (10), and was capable of 
sustaining the weight of a multitude. 

"Having seen the place of the festival thus adorned, Kansa gave orders, 
and said, 'To-morrow let the platforms and terraces and pavilions (11) be 
decorated with pictures and garlands and flags and images (12), and let 
them be scented with fragrant odours, and covered over with awnings 
(13). Let there be ample heaps of dry, pounded cow-dung (14) provided 


on the ground, and suitable refreshment chambers be covered over, and 
decorated with bells and ornamented arches (15). Let large water jars be 
securely fixed in order, capable of holding a copious supply, and 
provided with golden drinking-cups. Let apartments be prepared (16), 
and various kinds of beverage, in appropriate vessels, be ready. Let 
judges of the games be invited, and corporations with their chiefs. Let 
orders be issued to the wrestlers, and notice be given to the spectators; 
and let platforms for their accommodation be fitted up in the place of 
assembly.'" (17) 

When the meeting takes place, the site of the games is thus described: 
"Upon the following day the amphitheatre (18) was filled by the citizens, 
anxious to behold the games. The place of assembly (19) was supported 
by octagonal painted pillars (20), p. 553 fitted up with terraces and doors 
and bolts, with windows circular or crescent; shaped, and accommodated 
with seats with cushions (21), and it shone like the ocean whilst large 
clouds hang upon it, with spacious, substantial pavilions (22), fitted up 
for the sight of the combat; open to the front (23), but screened with 
beautiful and fine curtains (24), crowned with festoons of flowers, and 
glistening with radiance like autumnal clouds. The pavilions of the 
different companies and corporations, vast as mountains, were decorated 
with banners, bearing upon them the implements and emblems of the 
several crafts (25). The chambers of the inhabitants of the inner 
apartments shone near at hand, bright with gold and painting and net¬ 
work of gems: they were richly decorated with precious stones, were 
enclosed below with costly hangings, and ornamented above with spires 
and banners, and looked like mountains spreading their wings in the sky; 
while the rays of light reflected from the valuable jewels were blended 
with the waving of white chowries, and the musical tinkling of female 
ornaments. The separate pavilions of the courtesans were graced by 
lovely women, attired in the most splendid dresses (27), and emulated the 
radiance of the cars of the gods. In the place of assembly there were 
excellent seats, couches made of gold, and hangings of various colours, 
intermixed with bunches of flowers: and there were golden vases of 
water, and handsome places for refreshment, filled with fruits of various 
kinds, and cooling juices, and sherbets fit for drinking (28). And there 
were many other stages and platforms, constructed of strong timber, and 


hangings by hundreds and thousands were displayed: and upon the tops 
of the houses, chambers fitted up with delicate jalousies, through which 
the women might behold the sports, appeared like swans flying through 
the air. 

"In front stood the pavilion of Kansa, surpassing all the rest in splendour, 
looking like mount Meru in radiance; its sides, its columns, being 
covered with burnished gold; fastened with coloured cords; and every 
way worthy the presence of a king." 

In justification of the rendering of the above, an explanation of the 
technical terms, taken either from dictionaries or from the commentators, 
may be subjoined. (1) Kansa went to the Prekshagara, literally 'house of 
seeing;' but it is evident, from its interior being visible to spectators on 
the tops of the houses, as subsequently mentioned, that it was not a 
theatre, or covered edifice. If a building at all, it was merely a sort of 
stockade. One commentator calls it, 'a place made for seeing the 
sacrifice;' (2) Manchanam avalokaka. The Mancha is commonly 
understood to signify a raised platform, with a floor and a roof, ascended 

r r 

by a ladder: see Dictionary. (3) Mancha-vata. Vata is either 'site' or 
'inclosure,' and is used here without much affecting the sense of Mancha. 
The compound is explained by the commentators, 'prepared places', or 
'the sites of the platforms'. (4) The Sreriis, associations of artificers 
practising the same art. One of the commentaries understands the term to 
be here used to denote, not their station, but their labours: 'The structure 
was the work of the artificers.' (5) Several words occur here of technical 
import. The passage is, ###. Valabhi is said by the commentator to mean 

r 

a structure with a pent roof, supported by six columns. Kuti, a circular 
one, having seven roofs—something perhaps like a Chinese pagoda—and 
four columns. The Eka-stambha is a chamber, supported by one column. 
(6) Saraniryyuham. It is difficult to understand the necessity of rafters in 
an inclosure in which the platforms and stages seem to have been erected 
independently of any floor or wall: but the commentary explains 
Niryyuha, 'strong brackets, projecting from a house:' (7) Aslishta 
sushshta mancharohanam. The first epithet is explained, 'not contracted'; 
the second, 'well constructed'; and for the 'ascending' (Arohanam) we 
have 'where was a line of steps' or 'ladders' There is another reading of 



the text, however, which may be rendered, 'Having steps well secured in 
their ascent above'. (8) 'Seats for kings'. (9) Such is the literal purport of 
Sanchara-patha-sankulam; implying, possibly, the formation of passages 
by fences on either side. (10) This is doubtful: the phrase is Chhannam- 
tad-vedikabhi. Chhannam means, literally, 'covered,' and can scarcely be 
used in the sense of 'overspread or filled with.' Vedika means an elevated 
floor or terrace, with which a hall or edifice cannot well be 'covered;' and 
therefore requires the sense here given to Chhanna. The commentators 

_ r 

are silent. (11) The Manchavatas and Valabhis, as above: the other term is 
Vithi, 'a shop,' 'a stall,' 'a terrace,' 'a road.' (12) Let them be Vapushmanta; 
'having painted or sculptured figures'. The other commentary renders it 
merely 'pleasant' or 'agreeable'. (13) 'Covered above with cloths'. The use 
of the awning or Semiana is very common in India. (14) For the wrestlers 
to rub over their bodies to absorb the perspiration (15) This is all rather 
questionable: the passage is most usually, ###. Vali or Bali in one sense 
means 'the edge of a thatch,' and may be put for some sort of temporary 
structure, a kind of retiring or refreshment room for the boxers and 
wrestlers. In some copies it is read, 'beautiful with cloths spread,' on 
which the performers may sit when disengaged; perhaps a sort of carpet 
on the ground. (16) The expression is again Vali. Another sense of the 
word is, offering of viands, or of the remains of a sacrifice, to all beings; 
but that cannot be its purport here; nor is it ever used in the sense of 
viands in general. The verb Kalpa or Klrip also usually p. 555 implies 

r 

'making.' (17) Manchavata; 'in the Samaja,' or 'assembly.' (18) 
Maharanga, 'the great place of the performance.' Ranga is 'acting' or 
'representation;' also the place or site of it. (19) All the copies consulted, 
except one, offer an irregularity of construction, which, although 
defended by the commentators, is a license scarcely allowable. The 
epithets of the first verse are all in the plural number; they then occur in 
the singular, to agree with the only substantive in the description, 

r 

Samajavata. According to the commentaries, the plural term Manchas 
understood is the substantive to the epithets of the first stanza, and 
Samajavata the singular to those of the other verses. This awkwardness is 
however avoided by the reading of an old and very good copy, which 
puts it all in the singular; as ### (20) The expression is Charana, literally 
'foot;' explained by the commentator, Stambha, 'post' or 'pillar' (21) The 
reading of most of the copies is Sayanottama, which may be taken as the 




sense of Talottama, 'couches or benches with cushions.' (22) 
Manchagarais, 'temporary houses.' (21) Or 'fronting to the east'. (24) 
Nirmuktais: explained by the commentator to mean 'fine threads,' 
'network,' or 'gauze,' through which persons, females especially, may see 
without being seen. (25) ### (26) 'With ridges and projections'. The 
commentator explains this, 'with flags on the top of them.' (27) This 
appears to be intended for an epithet of the women, although Astararia is 
not usually applied to dress. (28) Phala, of course, is 'fruit.' Avadansa is 
explained in lexicons, what is eaten to excite thirst:' one comment gives 
it, what may be sucked,' as tamarinds, and the like. Changeri is 
explained, 'fluids for drinking, made with sorrel, or acid fruits;' that is, 
sherbets. (29) ### is an epithet of the Prekshagara, or look-out house of 
the women, situated on the tops of their houses, according to the 
commentators; an arrangement very compatible with the form of Indian 
houses, which have flat roofs, commonly enclosed by a trellis work, or 
jalousie of masonry. It is observable, that in the Vishnu Puraria, and in the 
Mahabharata, on various public occasions, the women take their places 
on the platforms, or in the pavilions, without curtains or screens. 

05. The terms here used are technical, and refer to the established modes of 
wrestling amongst Hindu athletae. 1. Sannipata is described 'mutual 
laying hold of.' 2. Avaduta, 'letting go of the adversary.' g. Ksheparia, 

r 

'pulling to, and casting back.' 4. Mushtinipata, 'striking with fists.' 5. 
Kilanipata, 'striking with the elbow.' 6. Vajranipata, 'striking with the 
fore-arm.' 7. Janunirghata, 'pressing or striking with the knees.' 8. 

r r 

Bahuvighattana, 'interlacing the arms.' 9. Padoddhuta, kicking.' 10. 
Prasrishta, 'intertwining of the whole body.' In some copies another term 
occurs, Asmanirghata, 'striking with stones,' or 'striking blows as hard as 
with stones;' for stones could scarcely be used in a contest specified as 
'one without weapons' 

06. Krishna contended with Chariura, 'who through distress and anger shook 
the flowers of his crest;' The two last terms are explained, the flower of 
the wreath on his head.' 

07. Et latus mediam sulcus diducit arenam. 

'The yielding sand being furrowed into a ditch or a water-course, by the 
dead bodies being dragged over it. The text is, ###. 








21. Chapter 


Krishna encourages his parents; places Ugrasena on the throne; becomes the 
pupil of Sandipani, whose son he recovers from the sea: he kills the marine 
demon Panchajana, and makes a horn of his shell. 

HAVING permitted to Devaki and Vasudeva an interval of true knowledge, 
through the contemplation of his actions, Hari again spread the delusions of his 
power over them and the tribe of Yadu. He said to them, "Mother; venerable 
father; you have both been long observed by Sankarsharia and myself with 
sorrow, and in fear of Kansa. He whose time passes not in respect to his father 
and mother, is a vile being, who descends in vain from virtuous parents. The 
lives of those produce good fruit, who reverence their parents, their spiritual 
guides, the Brahmans, and the gods. Pardon therefore, father, the impropriety of 
which we may have been culpable, in resenting without your orders, to which we 
acknowledge that we are subject, the oppression we suffered from the power and 
violence of Kansa." Thus speaking, they offered homage to the elders of the 
Yadu tribe in order, and then in a suitable manner paid their respects to the 
citizens. The wives of Kansa, and those of his father, then surrounded the body 
of the king, lying on the ground, and bewailed his fate in deep affliction. Hari in 
various ways expressed his regret for what had chanced, and endeavoured to 
console them, his own eyes being suffused with tears. The foe of Madhu then 
liberated Ugrasena from confinement, and placed him on the throne, which the 
death of his son had left vacant. The chief of the Yadavas, being crowned, 
performed the funeral rites of Kansa, and of the rest of the slain. When the 
ceremony was over, and Ugrasena had resumed his royal seat, Krishna addressed 
him, and said, "Sovereign lord, command boldly what else is to be done. The 
curse of Yayati has pronounced our race unworthy of dominion but with me, for 
your servant, you may issue your orders to the gods. How should kings disobey 
them?" 

Thus having spoken, the human Kesava summoned mentally the deity of the 
wind, who came upon the instant, and said to him, "Go, Vayu, to Indra, and 
desire him to lay aside his pomp, and resign to Ugrasena his splendid hall 
Sudharman: tell him that Krishna commands him to send the royal hall, the 


unrivalled gem of princely courts, for the assemblage of the race of Yadu." 
Accordingly Vayu went, and delivered the message to the husband of Sachi, who 
immediately gave up to him the hall Sudharman, and Vayu conveyed it to the 
Yadavas, the chiefs of whom thenceforth possessed this celestial court, 
emblazoned with jewels, and defended by the arm of Govinda. The two excellent 
Yadu youths, versed in all knowledge, and possessed of all wisdom, then 
submitted to instruction, as the disciples of teachers. Accordingly they repaired 
to Sandipani—who, though born in Kasi, resided at Avanti-to study the science 
of arms, and, becoming his pupils, were obedient and attentive to their master, 
exhibiting an example to all men of the observance of instituted rules. In the 
course of sixty-four days they had gone through the elements of military science, 
with the treatises on the use of arms, and directions for the mystic incantations, 
which secure the aid of supernatural weapons. Sandipani, astonished at such 
proficiency, and knowing that it exceeded human faculties, imagined that the sun 
and moon had become his scholars. When they had acquired all that he could 
teach, they said to him, "Now say what present shall be given to you, as the 
preceptor's fee." The prudent Sandipani, perceiving that they were endowed with 
more than mortal powers, requested them to give him his dead son, drowned in 
the sea of Prabhasa. Taking up their arms, they marched against the ocean; but 
the all-comprehending sea said to them, "I have not killed the son of Sandipani; 
a demon named Panchajana, who lives in the form of a conch shell, seized the 
boy: he is still under my waters. On hearing this, Krishna plunged into the sea; 
and having slain the vile Panchajana, he took the conch shell, which was formed 
of his bones (and bore it as his horn), the sound of which fills the demon hosts 
with dismay, animates the vigour of the gods, and annihilates unrighteousness. 
The heroes also recovered the boy from the pains of death, and restored him in 
his former person to his father. Rama and Janarddana then returned to Mathura, 
which was well presided over by Ugrasena, and abounded in a happy population 
both of men and women. 




Footnotes 

01. The curse pronounced on the elder sons of Yayati, on their refusing to 
take upon them their father's infirmities. 


02. They read through the Dhanur-veda, which treats of military matters; 
with the Rahasya, 'the mystical part;' and the Sangraha, 'collection' or 
'compendium,' said to be here the Astra-prayoga, the employment of 
weapons: 

03. Prabhasa is a place of pilgrimage in the west of India, on the coast of 
Guzerat, near the temple of Somanath, and town of Pattan Somanath. It is 
also known by the name of Soma-tirtha; Soma, or the moon, having been 
here cured of the consumption brought upon him by the imprecation of 
Daksha, his father-in-law. Mahabharata, Salya P., vol. III. 

04. The incidents of the two last chapters are related in the Bhagavata and 
Hari Vansa, often in the words of the text, but with many embellishments 
and additions, especially in the latter. The Brahma Vaivartta, on the other 
hand, makes still shorter work of these occurrences than our text. 




22. Chapter 


Jarasandha besieges Mathura; is defeated, but repeatedly renews the attack. 

PARASARA.—The mighty Kansa had married the two daughters of Jarasandha, 
one named Asti, the other Prapti. Jarasandha was king of Magadha, and a very 
powerful prince who, when he heard that Krishna had killed his son-in-law, was 
much incensed, and, collecting a large force, marched against Mathura, 
determined to put the Yadavas and Krishna to the sword. Accordingly he 
invested the city with three and twenty numerous divisions of his forces. Rama 
and Janarddana sallied from the town with a slender, but resolute force, and 
fought bravely with the armies of Magadha. The two youthful leaders prudently 
resolved to have recourse to their ancient weapons, and accordingly the bow of 
Hari, with two quivers filled with exhaustless arrows, and the mace called 
Kaumodaki, and the ploughshare of Balabhadra, as well as the club Saunanda, 
descended at a wish from heaven. Armed with these weapons, they speedily 
discomfited the king of Magadha and his hosts, and reentered the city in 
triumph. 

Although the wicked king of Magadha, Jarasandha, was defeated, yet Krishna 
knew that whilst he escaped alive he was not subdued; and in fact he soon 
returned with a mighty force, and was again forced by Rama and Krishna to fly. 
Eighteen times did the haughty prince of Magadha renew his attack upon the 
Yadavas, headed by Krishna; and was as often defeated and put to the rout by 
them, with very inferior numbers. That the Yadavas were not overpowered by 
their foes, was owing to the present might of the portion of the discus-armed 
Vishnu. It was the pastime of the lord of the universe, in his capacity of man, to 
launch various weapons against his enemies; for what effort of power to 
annihilate his foes could be necessary to him, whose fiat creates and destroys the 
world? but as subjecting himself to human customs, he formed alliances with the 
brave, and engaged in hostilities with the base. He had recourse to the four 
devices of policy, or negotiation, presents, sowing dissension, and chastisement; 
and sometimes even betook himself to flight. Thus imitating the conduct of 
human beings, the lord of the world pursued at will his sports. 




Footnotes 

01. With twenty-three Akshouhinis, each consisting of 109,300 infantry, 
65,610 horse, 22,870 chariots, and as many elephants. The Hari Vansa 
enumerates, as the allies or tributaries of Jarasandha, a number of princes 
from various parts of India, but this is a gratuitous embellishment. 

02. The Bhagavata and Hari Vansa say 'seventeen times.' The latter indulges 
in a prolix description of the first encounter; nothing of which occurs in 
the Bhagavata, any more than in our text. 




23. Chapter 


Birth of Kalayavana: he advances against Mathura. Krishna builds Dwaraka, and 
sends thither the Yadava tribe: he leads Kalayavana into the cave of 
Muchukunda: the latter awakes, consumes the Yavana king, and praises Krishna. 

PARASARA.—Syala having called Gargya the Brahman, whilst at the cow-pens, 
impotent, in an assembly of the Yadavas, they all laughed; at which he was 
highly offended, and repaired to the shores of the western sea, where he engaged 
in arduous penance to obtain a son, who should be a terror to the tribe of Yadu. 
Propitiating Mahadeva, and living upon iron sand for twelve years, the deity at 
last was pleased with him, and gave him the desired boon. The king of the 
Yavanas, who was childless, became the friend of Gargya; and the latter begot a 
son by his wife, who was as black as a bee, and was thence called Kalayavana. 
The Yavana king having placed his son, whose breast was as hard as the point of 
the thunderbolt, upon the throne, retired to the woods. Inflated with conceit of 
his prowess, Kalayavana demanded of Narada who were the most mighty heroes 
on earth. To which the sage answered, "The Yadavas." Accordingly Kalayavana 
assembled many myriads of Mlechchhas and barbarians, and with a vast 
armament of elephants, cavalry, chariots, and foot, advanced impatiently against 
Mathura and the Yadavas; wearying every day the animal that carried him, but 
insensible of fatigue himself. 

When Krishna knew of his approach, he reflected that if the Yadavas 
encountered the Yavana, they would be so much weakened by the conflict, that 
they would then be overcome by the king of Magadha; that their force was much 
reduced by the war with Magadha, whilst that of Kalayavana was unbroken; and 
that the enemy might be therefore victorious. Thus the Yadavas were exposed to 
a double danger. He resolved therefore to construct a citadel for the Yadu tribe, 
that should not be easily taken; one that even women might defend, and in which 
therefore the heroes of the house of Vrishni should be secure; one in which the 
male combatants of the Yadavas should dread no peril, though he himself should 
be drunk or careless, asleep or abroad. Thus reflecting, Krishna solicited a space 
of twelve furlongs from the ocean, and there he built the city of Dwaraka 3, 
defended by high ramparts, and beautified with gardens and reservoirs of water, 


crowded with houses and buildings, and splendid as the capital of Indra, 
Amaravati. Thither Janarddana conducted the inhabitants of Mathura, and then 
awaited at that city the approach of Kalayavana. 

When the hostile army encamped round Mathura, Krishna unarmed went forth, 
and beheld the Yavana king. Kalayavana, the strong-armed, recognizing 
Vasudeva, pursued him; him whom the thoughts of perfect ascetics cannot 
overtake. Thus pursued, Krishna entered a large cavern, where Muchukunda, the 
king of men, was asleep. The rash Yavana entering the cave, and beholding a 
man lying asleep there, concluded it must be Krishna, and kicked him; at which 
Muchukunda awoke, and casting on him an angry glance, the Yavana was 
instantly consumed, and reduced to ashes. For in a battle between the gods and 
demons, Muchukunda had formerly contributed to the defeat of the latter; and, 
being overcome with sleep, he solicited of the gods as a boon that he should 
enjoy a long repose. "Sleep long and soundly," said the gods; "and whoever 
disturbs you shall be instantly burnt to ashes by fire emanating from your body." 

Having burnt up the iniquitous Yavana, and beholding the foe of Madhu, 
Muchukunda asked him who he was. "I am born," he replied, "in the lunar race, 
in the tribe of Yadu, and am the son of Vasudeva." Muchukunda, recollecting the 
prophecy of old Garga, fell down before the lord of all, Hari, saying, "Thou art 
known, supreme lord, to be a portion of Vishnu; for it was said of old by Garga, 
that at the end of the twenty-eighth Dwapara age Hari would be born in the 
family of Yadu. Thou art he, without doubt, the benefactor of mankind; for thy 
glory I am unable to endure. Thy words are of deeper tone than the muttering of 
the rain cloud; and earth sinks down beneath the pressure of thy feet. As in the 
battle between the gods and demons the Asuras were unable to sustain my lustre, 
so even am I incapable of bearing thy radiance. Thou alone art the refuge of 
every living being who has lighted on the world. Do thou, who art the alleviator 
of all distress, shew favour upon me, and remove from me all that is evil. Thou 
art the oceans, the mountains, the rivers, the forests: thou art earth, sky, air, 
water, and fire: thou art mind, intelligence, the unevolved principle, the vital airs, 
the lord of life—the soul; all that is beyond the soul; the all-pervading; exempt 
from the vicissitudes of birth; devoid of sensible properties, sound and the like; 
undecaying, illimitable, imperishable, subject neither to increase nor diminution: 
thou art that which is Brahma, without beginning or end. From thee the 
immortals, the progenitors, the Yakshas, Gandharbhas, and Kinnaras, the 



Siddhas, the nymphs of heaven, men, animals, birds, deer, reptiles, and all the;, 
vegetable world, proceed; and all that has been, or will be, or is now, moveable 
or fixed. All that is amorphous or has form, all that is subtile, gross, stable, or 
moveable, thou art, O creator of the world; and beside thee there is not any thing. 
O lord, I have been whirled round in the circle of worldly existence for ever, and 
have suffered the three classes of affliction, and there is no rest whatever. I have 
mistaken pains for pleasures, like sultry vapours for a pool of water; and their 
enjoyment has yielded me nothing but sorrow. The earth, dominion, forces, 
treasures, friends, children, wife, dependants, all the objects of sense, have I 
possessed, imagining them to be sources of happiness; but I found that in their 
changeable nature, O lord, they were nothing but vexation. The gods themselves, 
though high in heaven, were in need of my alliance. Where then is everlasting 
repose? Who without adoring thee, who art the origin of all worlds, shall attain, 
O supreme deity, that rest which endures for ever? Beguiled by thy delusions, 
and ignorant of thy nature, men, after suffering the various penalties of birth, 
death, and infirmity, behold the countenance of the king of ghosts, and suffer in 
hell dreadful tortures, the reward of their own deeds. Addicted to sensual 
objects, through thy delusions I revolve in the whirpool of selfishness and pride; 
and hence I come to thee, as my final refuge, who art the lord deserving of all 
homage, than whom there is no other asylum; my mind afflicted with repentance 
for my trust in the world, and desiring the fulness of felicity, emancipation from 
all existence." 




Footnotes 

01. This legend of the origin of Kalayavana is given also by the Hari Vansa. 
The Bhagavata, like our text, comes at once to the siege of Mathura by 
this chief; but the Hari Vansa suspends the story, for more than thirty 
chapters, to narrate an origin of the Yadavas, and sundry adventures of 
Krishna and Rama to the south-west. Most of these have no other 
authority, and are no doubt inventions of the Dakhini compiler; and the 
others are misplaced. 

02. So the Bhagavata describes him as leading a host of Mlechchhas, or 
barbarians, against Krishna; but in the Mahabharata, Sabha Parvan, vol. 


I. where Krishna describes the power of Jarasandha, he admits that he 
and the Yadavas fled from Mathura to the west, through fear of that king, 
but no account is given of any siege of Mathura by Kalayavana. The only 
indication of such a person is the mention that Bhagadatta, the Yavana 
king, who rules over Muru and Naraka in the west and south, is one of 
his most attached feudatories. This king is in various other places called 
king of Pragjyotish, as he is in a subsequent passage of the same book, 
Sabha P., and this name is always applied to the the west of Asam. His 
subjects are, however, still Yavanas and Mlechchhas, and he presents 
horses, caps set with jewels, and swords with ivory hilts; articles scarcely 
to be found in Asam, which cannot well be the seat of his sovereignty. It 
seems most likely therefore that the story may have originated in some 
knowledge of the power and position of the Greek-Bactrian princes, or 
their Scythian successors, although in the latter compilations it has been 
mixed up with allusions to the first Mohammedan aggressions. See As. 
Res. V. 506 and XV. 100. 

03. According to the Mahabharata, he only enlarged and fortified the ancient 
city of Kusasthali, founded by Raivata. Sabha P.: see also of our text. 

04. The name of Muchukunda, as one of the sons of Mandhatri, occurs but 
no further notice is taken of him. The Bhagavata specifies his being the 
son of that king, and relates the same story of his long sleep as the text. 
The same occurs in the Hari Vansa. The general character of the legends 
in this chapter is that of reference to something familiar, rather than its 
narration. In the Hari Vansa the opposite extreme is observable, and there 
the legends are as prolix as here they are concise. The Bhagavata follows 
a middle course; but it seems unlikely that in either of the three we have 
the original fables. 




24. Chapter 


Muchukunda goes to perform penance. Krishna takes the army and treasures of 
Kalayavana, and repairs with them to Dwaraka. Balarama visits Vraja: inquiries 
of its inhabitants after Krishna. 

THUS praised by the wise Muchukunda, the sovereign of all things, the eternal 
lord, Hari, said to him, "Go to whatever celestial regions you wish, lord of men, 
possessed of might irresistible, honoured by my favour. When you have fully 
enjoyed all heavenly pleasures, you shall be born in a distinguished family, 
retaining the recollection of your former births; and you shall finally obtain 
emancipation." Having heard this promise, and prostrated himself before 
Achyuta, the lord of the world, Muchukunda, went forth from the cave, and 
beholding men of diminutive stature, now first knew that the Kali age had 
arrived. The king therefore departed to Gandhamadana, the shrine of 
Narariarayaria, to perform penance. 

Krishna having by this stratagem destroyed his enemy, returned to Mathura, and 
took captive his army, rich in horses, elephants and cars, which he conducted to 
Dwaraka, and delivered to Ugrasena, and the Yadu race was relieved from all 
fear of invasion. Baladeva, when hostilities had entirely ceased, being desirous 
of seeing his kinsmen, went to Nanda's cow-pens, and there again conversed 
with the herdsmen and their females, with affection and respect. By some, the 
elders, he was embraced; others, the juniors, he embraced; and with those of his 
own age, male or female, he talked and laughed. The cowherds made many kind 
speeches to Halayudha; but some of the Gopis spoke to him with the affectation 
of anger, or with feelings of jealousy, as they inquired after the loves of Krishna 
with the women of Mathura. "Is all well with the fickle and inconstant Krishna?" 
said they: "Does the volatile swain, the friend of an instant, amuse the women of 
the city by laughing at our rustic efforts (to please him)? Does he ever think of 
us, singing in chorus to his songs? Will he not come here once again to see his 
mother? But why talk of these things? it is a different tale to tell for him without 
us, and for us without him. Father, mother, brother, husband, kin, what have we 
not abandoned for his sake? but he is a monument of ingratitude. Yet tell us, 
does not Krishna talk of coming here? Falsehood is never, O Krishna, to be 


uttered by thee. Verily this is Damodara, this is Govinda, who has given up his 
heart to the damsels of the city, who has no longer any regard for us, but looks 
upon us with disdain." So saying, the Gopis, whose minds were fixed on 
Krishna, addressed Rama in his place, calling him Damodara and Govinda, and 
laughed and were merry; and Rama consoled them by communicating to them 
agreeable, modest, affectionate, and gentle messages from Krishna. With the 
cowherds he talked mirthfully, as he had been wont to do, and rambled along 
with them over the lands of Vraja. 


Footnotes 

01. This visit of Balarama to Vraja is placed by the Hari Vansa anterior to the 
fall of Mathura; by the Bhagavata, long subsequent to the establishment 
of the Yadus at Dwaraka. 




25. Chapter 


Balarama finds wine in the hollow of a tree; becomes inebriated; commands the 
Yamuna to come to him, and on her refusal drags her out of her course: Lakshmi 
gives him ornaments and a dress: he returns to Dwaraka, and marries Revati. 

WHILST the mighty Sesha, the upholder of the globe, was thus engaged in 
wandering amidst the forests with the herdsmen, in the disguise of a mortal— 
having rendered great services to earth, and still considering what more was to 
be achieved—Varuna, in order to provide for his recreation, said to his wife 
Varum (the goddess of wine), "Thou, Madira, art ever acceptable to the powerful 
Ananta; go therefore, auspicious and kind goddess, and promote his 
enjoyments." Obeying these commands, Varum went and established herself in 
the hollow of a Kadamba tree in the woods of Vrindavana. Baladeva, roaming 
about, came there, and smelling the pleasant fragrance of liquor, resumed his 
ancient passion for strong drink. The holder of the ploughshare observing the 
vinous drops distilling from the Kadamba tree, was much delighted, and 
gathered and quaffed them along with the herdsmen and the Gopis, whilst those 
who were skilful with voice and lute celebrated him in their songs. Being 
inebriated with the wine, and the drops of perspiration standing like pearls upon 
his limbs, he called out, not knowing what he said, "Come hither, Yamuna river, 
I want to bathe." The river, disregarding the words of a drunken man, came not 
at his bidding: on which Rama in a rage took up his ploughshare, which he 
plunged into her bank, and dragged her to him, calling out, "Will you not come, 
you jade? will you not come? Now go where you please (if you can)." Thus 
saying, he compelled the dark river to quit its ordinary course, and follow him 
whithersoever he wandered through the wood. Assuming a mortal figure, the 
Yamuna, with distracted looks, approached Balabhadra, and entreated him to 
pardon her, and let her go: but he replied, "I will drag you with my ploughshare 
in a thousand directions, since you contemn my prowess and strength." At last, 
however, appeased by her reiterated prayers, he let her go, after she had watered 
all the country. When he had bathed, the goddess of beauty, Lakshmi, came and 
gave him a beautiful lotus to place in one ear, and an earring for the other; a 
fresh necklace of lotus flowers, sent by Varuna; and garments of a dark blue 
colour, as costly as the wealth of the ocean: and thus decorated with a lotus in 


one ear, a ring in the other, dressed in blue garments, and wearing a garland, 
Balarama appeared united with loveliness. Thus decorated, Rama sported two 
months in Vraja, and then returned to Dwaraka, where the married Revati, the 
daughter of king Raivata, by whom he had two sons, Nishatha and Ulmuka. 


Footnotes 

01. The great serpent, of whom Balarama is an incarnation. 

02. There is no vinous exudation from the Kadamba tree (Nauclea 
Kadamba), but its flowers are said to yield a spirit by distillation; whence 
Kadambari is one of the synonymes of wine, or spiritous liquor. The 
grammarians, however, also derive the word from some legend, stating it 
to be so called because it was produced from the hollow of a Kadamba 
tree on the Gomantha mountain. The Hari Vansa, which alone makes the 
Gomantha mountain the scene of an exploit of Krishna and Rama, makes 
no mention of this origin of wine; and the Bhagavata merely says that 
Varum took up her abode in the hollow of a tree. There must be some 
other authority therefore for this story. 

03. The Bhagavata and Hari Vansa repeat this story; the latter very 
imperfectly; the former adds, that the Yamuna is still to be seen following 
the course along which she was dragged by Balarama. The legend 
probably alludes to the construction of canals from the Jumna, for the 
purposes of irrigation; and the works of the Mohammedans in this way, 
which are well known, were no doubt preceded by similar canals dug by 
order of Hindu princes. 




26. Chapter 


Krishna carries off Rukmini: the princes who come to rescue her repulsed by 
Balarama. Rukmin overthrown, but spared by Krishna, founds Bhojakata. 
Pradyumna born of Rukmini. 

BHISHMAKA was king of Vidarbha, residing at Kundina. He had a son named 
Rukmin, and a beautiful daughter termed Rukmini. Krishna fell in love with the 
latter, and solicited her in marriage; but her brother who hated Krishna, would 
not assent to the espousals. At the suggestion of Jarasandha, and with the 
concurrence of his son, the powerful sovereign Bhishmaka affianced Rukmini to 
Sisupala. In order to celebrate the nuptials, Jarasandha and other princes, the 
friends of Sisupala, assembled in the capital of Vidarbha; and Krishna, attended 
by Balabhadra and many other Yadavas, also went to Kundina to witness the 
wedding. When there, Hari contrived, on the eve of the nuptials, to carry off the 
princess, leaving Rama and his kinsmen to sustain the weight of his enemies. 

r r r 

Pauridraka, the illustrious Dantavakra, Viduratha, Sisupala, Jarasandha, Salya, 
and other kings, indignant at the insult, exerted themselves to kill Krishna, but 
were repelled by Balarama and the Yadavas. Rukmin, vowing that he would 
never enter Kundina again until he had slain Kesava in fight, pursued and 
overtook him. In the combat that ensued, Krishna destroyed with his discus, as if 
in sport, the host of Rukmin, with all its horse, and elephants, and foot, and 
chariots, and overthrew him, and hurled him on the ground, and would have put 
him to death, but was withheld by the entreaties of Rukmini. "He is my only 
brother," she exclaimed, "and must not be slain by thee: restrain your wrath, O 
divine lord, and give me my brother in charity." Thus addressed by her, Krishna, 
whom no acts affect, spared Rukmin and he (in pursuance of his vow) founded 
the city Bhojakata, and ever afterwards dwelt therein. After the defeat of 
Rukmin, Krishna married Rukmini in due form, having first made her his own 
by the Rakshasa ritual. She bore him the gallant Pradyumna, a portion of the 
deity of love. The demon Sambara carried him off, but he slew the demon. 




Footnotes 


01. Vidarbha is the country of Berar, and the name remains in the present city 
of Beder: the capital however, Kundinapur, is commonly identified with 
a place called Kundapur, about forty miles north-east of Amaravati (in 
Berar). 

02. When she had gone forth from the city to worship Ambika: Bhagavata. 
Indram, the wife of Indra: Hari Vansa. Our text tells the circumstance 
more concisely than the others. 

03. After depriving him of his eyebrows and hair. In the Bhagavata, 
Balarama also interferes in favour of Rukmin, and reproves Krishna for 
disfiguring him. 

04. Of course this was somewhere in the neighbourhood of Kundina or 
Vidarbha, and is usually supposed to be situated on the Narmada. 

05. That is, by violence: thus Manu; "The seizure of a maiden by force, 
whilst she weeps and calls for assistance, after her kinsmen and friends 
have been slain in battle, or wounded, and their houses broken open, is 
the marriage called Rakshasa." III. 33. According to the Bhagavata, 
Rukmini sends to invite Krishna to carry her off, and instructs him how 
to proceed. 




27. Chapter 


Pradyumna stolen by Sambara; thrown into the sea, and swallowed by a fish; 
found by Mayadevi: he kills Sambara, marries Mayadevi, and returns with her to 
Dwaraka. Joy of Rukmini and Krishna. 

MAITREYA.—How, Muni, happened it that the hero Pradyumna was carried 
away by Sambara? and in what manner was the mighty Sambara killed by 
Pradyumna? 

PARASARA.—When Pradyumna was but six days old, he was stolen from the 
lying-in chamber by Sambara, terrible as death; for the demon foreknew that 
Pradyumna, if he lived, would be his destroyer. Taking away the boy, Sambara 
cast him into the ocean, swarming with monsters, into a whirlpool of roaring 
waves, the haunt of the huge creatures of the deep. A large fish swallowed the 
child, but he died not, and was born anew from its belly for that fish, with others, 
was caught by the fishermen, and delivered by them to the great Asura Sambara. 
His wife Mayadevi, the mistress of his household, superintended the operations 
of the cooks, and saw, when the fish was cut open, a beautiful child, looking like 
a new shoot of the blighted tree of love. Whilst wondering who this should be, 
and how he could have got into the belly of the fish, Narada came to satisfy her 
curiosity, and said to the graceful dame, "This is the son of him by whom the 
whole world is created and destroyed, the son of Vishnu, who was stolen by 
Sambara from the lying-in chamber, and tossed by him into the sea, where he 
was swallowed by the fish. He is now in thy power; do thou, beautiful woman, 
tenderly rear this jewel of mankind." Thus counselled by Narada, Mayadevi took 
charge of the boy, and carefully reared him from childhood, being fascinated by 
the beauty of his person. Her affection became still more impassioned when he 
was decorated with the bloom of adolescence. The gracefully-moving Mayavati 
then, fixing her heart and eyes upon the high-minded Pradyumna, gave him, 
whom she regarded as herself, all her magic (and illusive) powers. 

Observing these marks of passionate affection, the son of Krishna said to the 
lotus-eyed Mayadevi, "Why do you indulge in feelings so unbecoming the 
character of a mother?" To which she replied, "Thou art not a son of mine; thou 


art the son of Vishnu, whom Kala Sambara carried away, and threw into the sea: 
thou vast swallowed by a fish, but wast rescued by me from its belly. Thy fond 
mother, O beloved, is still weeping for thee." When the valiant Pradyumna heard 
this, he was filled with wrath, and defied Sambara to battle. In the conflict that 
ensued, the son of Madhava slew the whole host of Sambara. Seven times he 
foiled the delusions of the enchanter, and making himself master of the eighth, 
turned it against Sambara, and killed him. By the same faculty he ascended into 
the air, and proceeded to his father's house, where he alighted, along with 
Mayavati, in the inner apartments. When the women beheld Pradyumna, they 
thought it was Krishna himself. Rukmini, her eyes dimmed with tears, spoke 
tenderly to him, and said, "Happy is she who has a son like this, in the bloom of 
youth. Such would be the age of my son Pradyumna, if he was alive. Who is the 
fortunate mother adorned by thee? and yet from thy appearance, and from the 
affection I feel for thee, thou art assuredly the son of Hari." 

At this moment Krishna, accompanied by Narada, arrived; and the latter said to 
the delighted Rukmini, "This is thine own son, who has come hither after killing 
Sambara, by whom, when an infant, he was stolen from the lying-in chamber. 
This is the virtuous Mayavati, his wife, and not the wife of Sambara. Hear the 
reason. When Manmatha, the deity of love, had perished, the goddess of beauty, 
desirous to secure his revival, assumed a delusive form, and by her charms 
fascinated the demon Sambara, and exhibited herself to him in various illusory 
enjoyments. This thy son is the descended Kama; and this is the goddess Rati, 
his wife. There is no occasion for any uncertainty: this is thy daughter-in-law." 
Then Rukmini was glad, and Kesava also; the whole city resounded with 
exclamations of joy, and all the people of Dwaraka were surprised at Rukmini's 
recovering a son who had so long been lost. 


Footnotes 

01. The Bhagavata tells the story in the same manner, but the Hari Vansa 
omits the part of the fish. 

02. When he was reduced to ashes by a fiery glance from Siva, in resentment 
of his inflaming him with passion for Uma. This legend is a favourite 


with the Saiva Puranas, and is told in the Linga and Kalika, also in the 
Padma P. and Kasi Khanda of the Skanda P. They do not say much about 
his resuscitation however; Siva, in pity of Rati's grief, restoring him only 
to a bodiless existence as Ananga, whose place is to be in the hearts of 
men. The Linga adds, that when Vishnu, in consequence of the curse of 
Bhrigu, shall be born as the son of Vasudeva, Kama shall be born as one 
of his sons. 

03. The daughter of Daksha, but not enumerated amongst those formerly 
specified : she was born from his perspiration, according to the Kalika P. 




28. Chapter 


Wives of Krishna. Pradyumna has Aniruddha: nuptials of the latter. Balarama 
beat at dice, becomes incensed, and slays Rukmin and others. 

RUKMINI bare to Krishna these other sons, Charudeshria, Sudeshria, 
Charudeha, Sushena, Charugupta, Bhadracharu, Charuvinda, Sucharu, and the 
very mighty Cham; also one daughter, Charumati. Krishna had seven other 
beautiful wives, Kalindi, Mitravrinda, the virtuous Nagnajiti, the queen 
Jambavati; Rohirii, of beautiful form; the amiable and excellent daughter of the 
king of Madra, Madri; Satyabhama, the daughter of Satrujit; and Lakshmaria, of 
lovely smiles. Besides these, he had sixteen thousand other wives. 

The heroic Pradyumna was chosen for her lord, at her public choice of a 
husband, by the daughter of Rukmin; and he had by her the powerful and gallant 
prince Aniruddha, who was fierce in fight, an ocean of prowess, and the tamer of 
his foes. Kesava demanded in marriage for him the granddaughter of Rukmin; 
and although the latter was inimical to Krishna, he betrothed the maiden (who 
was his son's daughter) to the son of his own daughter (her cousin Aniruddha). 
Upon the occasion of the nuptials Rama and other Yadavas attended Krishna to 
Bhojakata, the city of Rukmin. After the wedding had been solemnized, several 
of the kings, headed by him of Kalinga, said to Rukmin, "This wielder of the 
ploughshare is ignorant of the dice, which may be converted into his misfortune: 
why may we not contend with him, and beat him, in play?" The potent Rukmin 
replied to them, and said, "So let it be:" and he engaged Balarama at a game of 
dice in the palace. Balarama soon lost to Rukmin a thousand Nishkas he then 
staked and lost another thousand; and then pledged ten thousand, which Rukmin, 
who was well skilled in gambling, also won. At this the king of Kalinga laughed 
aloud, and the weak and exulting Rukmin grinned, and said, "Baladeva is losing, 
for he knows nothing of the game; although, blinded by a vain passion for play, 
he thinks he understands the dice." Halayudha, galled by the broad laughter of 
the Kalinga prince, and the contemptuous speech of Rukmin, was exceedingly 
angry, and, overcome with passion, increased his stake to ten millions of 
Nishkas. Rukmin accepted the challenge, and therefore threw the dice. Baladeva 
won, and cried aloud, "The stake is mine." But Rukmin called out as loudly, that 


he was the winner. "Tell no lies, Bala," said he: "the stake is yours; that is true; 
but I did not agree to it: although this be won by you, yet still I am the winner." 
A deep voice was then heard in the sky, inflaming still more the anger of the 
high-spirited Baladeva, saying, "Bala has rightly won the whole sum, and 
Rukmin speaks falsely: although he did not accept the pledge in words, he did so 
by his acts (having cast the dice)." Balarama thus excited, his eyes red with rage, 
started up, and struck Rukmin with the board on which the game was played, 
and killed him. Taking hold of the trembling king of Kalinga, he knocked out the 
teeth which he had shewn when he laughed. Laying hold of a golden column, he 
dragged it from its place, and used it as a weapon to kill those princes who had 
taken part with his adversaries. Upon which the whole circle, crying out with 
terror, took to flight, and escaped from the wrath of Baladeva. When Krishna 
heard that Rukmin had been killed by his brother, he made no remark, being 
afraid of Rukmini on the one hand, and of Bala on the other; but taking with him 
the newly wedded Aniruddha, and the Yadava tribe, he returned to Dwaraka. 


Footnotes 

01. The number specified, however, both in this place and in c. 32, is nine, 
instead of eight. The commentator endeavours to explain the difference 
by identifying Rohirii with Jambavati; but in the notices of Krishna's 
posterity, both in this work and in the Bhagavata, she is distinct from 
Jambavati. She seems, however, to be an addition to the more usually 
specified eight, of whose several marriages the Bhagavata gives the best 
account. In addition to the three first, respecting whom particulars are 
found in all, Kalindi, or the Yamuna, is the daughter of the sun, whom 
Krishna meets on one of his visits to Indraprastha, and who claims him as 
the reward of her penance. His next wife, Mitravinda, is the daughter of 
his maternal aunt, Rajadhidevi, and sister of Vinda and Anuvinda, kings 
of Avanti: she chooses him at her Swayambara. The Hari Vansa calls her 
Saudatta, daughter of Sivi; and she is subsequently termed Saivya by our 
text. Nagnajiti or Satya, the next wife, was the daughter of Nagnajit, king 
of Kausala, and was the prize of Krishna's overcoming seven fierce bulls, 
whom no other hero had encountered with success. Bhadra, princess of 


Kekaya, also Krishna's cousin, the daughter of Srutakirtti, was his next: 
and his eighth wife was Madri, the daughter of the king of Madra; 
named, according to the Bhagavata, Laksharia; and to the Hari V., 
Saubhima; distinguishing, as does our text, clearly Lakshmana from 
Madri, and like it having no satisfactory equivalent for Bhadra. The Hari 
Vansa does not name Rohirii, but specifies other names, as Vrihati, &c. In 
the life of Krishna, taken from the Bhagavata through a Persian 
translation, published by Maurice, there is a curious instance of the 
barbarous distortion of Sanscrit names by the joint labours of the English 
and Persian translators: the wives of Krishna are written, Rokemenee 
(Rukmini), Seteebhavani (Satyabhama), Jamoometee (Jambavati), 
Kalenderee (Kalindi), Lechmeena (Lakshmana), Soeta (Satya?), 
Bhedravatee (Bhadra), Mihrbenda (Mitravinda). 

02. These, according to the Mahabharata, Adi P., were Apsarasas, or nymphs. 
In the Dana Dharma they become Krishna's wives through a boon given 
him by Uma. 

03. The Nishka is a weight of gold, but according to different authorities of 
very different amount. The commentator here terms it a weight of four 
Suvarrias, each about 175 grains troy. 

04. The Bhagavata and Hari Vansa, which both tell this story, agree in the 
death of Rukmin; but in the Mahabharata he appears in the war, on the 
side of the Pandavas. The occurrence is a not very favourable picture of 
courtly manners; but scenes of violence have never been infrequent at the 
courts of Rajput princes. 




29. Chapter 


Indra comes to Dwaraka, and reports to Krishna the tyranny of Naraka. Krishna 
goes to his city, and puts him to death. Earth gives the earrings of Aditi to 
Krishna, and praises him. He liberates the princesses made captive by Naraka, 
sends them to Dwaraka, and goes to Swarga with Satyabhama. 

SAKRA, the lord of the three worlds, came mounted on his fierce elephant 
Airavata to visit Sauri (Krishna) at Dwaraka. Having entered the city, and been 
welcomed by Hari, he related to the hero the deeds of the demon Naraka. "By 
thee, Madhusudana, lord of the gods," said Indra, "in a mortal condition, all 

r r 

sufferings have been soothed. Arishta, Dhenuka, Chariura, Mushtika, Kesin, who 
sought to injure helpless man, have all been slain by thee. Kansa, Kuvalayapida, 
the child-destroying Putana, have been killed by thee; and so have other 
oppressors of the world. By thy valour and wisdom the three worlds have been 
preserved, and the gods, obtaining their share of the sacrifices offered by the 
devout, enjoy satisfaction. But now hear the occasion on which I have come to 
thee, and which thou art able to remedy. The son of the earth, called Naraka, who 
mles over the city of Pragjyotisha, inflicts a great injury upon all creatures. 
Carrying off the maidens of gods, saints, demons, and kings, he shuts them up in 
his own palace. He has taken away the umbrella of Varuria, impermeable to 
water, the jewel mountain crest of Mandara, and the celestial nectar-dropping 
earrings of my mother Aditi; and he now demands my elephant Airavata. I have 
thus explained to you, Govinda, the tyranny of the Asura; you can best determine 
how it is to be prevented." 

Having heard this account, the divine Hari gently smiled, and, rising from his 
throne, took Indra by the hand: then wishing for the eater of the serpents, Garuda 
immediately appeared; upon whom his master, having first seated Satyabhama 
upon his back, ascended, and flew to Pragjyotisha. Indra mounted his elephant, 
and, in the sight of the inhabitants of Dwaraka, went to the abode of the gods. 

The environs of Pragjyotisha were defended by nooses, constructed by the 
demon Muru, the edges of which were as sharp as razors; but Hari, throwing his 
discus Sudarsana amongst them, cut them to pieces. Then Muni started up, but 


Kesava slew him, and burnt his seven thousand sons, like moths, with the flame 
of the edge of his discus. Having slain Mum, Hayagriva, and Panchajana, the 
wise Hari rapidly reached the city of Pragjyotisha: there a fierce conflict took 
place with the troops of Naraka, in which Govinda destroyed thousands of 
demons; and when Naraka came into the field, showering upon the deity all sorts 
of weapons, the wielder of the discus, and annihilator of the demon tribe, cut 
him in two with his celestial missile. Naraka being slain, Earth, bearing the two 
earrings of Aditi, approached the lord of the world, and said, "When, O lord, I 
was upheld by thee in the form of a boar, thy contact then engendered this my 
son. He whom thou gayest me has now been killed by thee: take therefore these 
two earrings, and cherish his progeny. Thou, lord, whose aspect is ever gracious, 
hast come to this sphere, in a portion of thyself, to lighten my burden. Thou art 
the eternal creator, preserver, and destroyer of the universe; the origin of all 
worlds, and one with the universe: what praise can be worthily offered to thee? 
Thou art the pervader, and that which is pervaded; the act, the agent, and the 
effect; the universal spirit of all beings: what praise can be worthily offered to 
thee? Thou art the abstract soul, the sentient and the living soul of all beings, the 
imperishable: but since it is not possible to praise thee worthily, then why should 
the hopeless attempt proceed? Have compassion, O universal soul, and forgive 
the sins which Naraka has committed. Verily it is for the sanctification of thy son 
that he has been killed by thee." The lord, who is the substance of all creatures, 
having replied to the earth, "Even so," proceeded to redeem the various gems 
from the dwelling of Naraka. In the apartments of the women he found sixteen 
thousand and one hundred damsels he also beheld in the palace six thousand 
large elephants, each having four tusks; twenty-one lakhs of horses of Kamboja 
and other excellent breeds: these Govinda dispatched to Dwaraka, in charge of 
the servants of Naraka. The umbrella of Varuna, the jewel mountain, which he 
also recovered, he placed upon Garuda; and mounting him himself, and taking 
Satyabhama with him, he set off to the heaven of the gods, to restore the earrings 
of Aditi. 




Footnotes 


01. By Vishnu, as the Varaha Avatara; but found and adopted by Janaka. 


Kalika P. 

02. In the centre of the country of Kamarupa, inhabited by Kiratas; the site of 
the shrines of Devi, as Dikkaravasini and Kamakhya. Kalika P. 

03. These were captive princesses, according to the Bhagavata; Apsarasas, or 
celestial nymphs, according to the Kalika P.; and these upon their rescue 
by Krishna became his wives. 

04. The legend of Naraka is related in more detail in the Bhagavata and Hari 
Vansa, but is still more fully narrated in the Kalika Upa-purana. It may be 
considered as one of the various intimations that occur in the Puranas of 
hostilities between the worshippers of Vishnu and Siva; Naraka being in 
an especial degree favoured by the latter. 




30. Chapter 


Krishna restores her earrings to Aditi, and is praised by her: he visits the gardens 
of Indra, and at the desire of Satyabhama carries off the Parijata tree. Sachi 
excites Indra to its rescue. Conflict between the gods and Krishna, who defeats 
them. Satyabhama derides them. They praise Krishna. 

r 

GARUDA, laden with the umbrella of Varuria and the jewel mountain, and 
bearing Hrishikesa on his back to the court of Indra, went lightly, as if in sport, 
along. When they arrived at the portals of Swarga, Hari blew his shell; on which 
the gods advanced to meet him, bearing respectful offerings. Having received the 
homage of the divinities, Krishna went to the palace of the mother of the gods, 
whose turrets resembled white clouds; and on beholding Aditi, paid his respects 
to her, along with Sakra; and, presenting to her her own earrings, informed her of 
the destruction of the demon Naraka. The mother of the world, well pleased, 
then fixed her whole thoughts upon Hari, the creator, and thus pronounced his 
praise: "Glory to thee, O god with the lotus eyes, who removest all fear from 
those that worship thee. Thou art the eternal, universal, and living soul; the 
origin of all beings; the instigator of the mental faculty, and faculties of sense; 
one with the three qualities; beyond the three qualities; exempt from contraries; 
pure; existing in the hearts of all; void of colour, extension, and every transient 
modification; unaffected by the vicissitudes of birth or death, sleep or waking. 
Thou art evening, night, and day; earth, sky, air, water, and fire; mind, intellect, 
and individuality. Thou art the agent of creation, duration, and dissolution; the 
master over the agent; in thy forms which are called Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva. 
Thou art gods, Yakshas, Daityas, Rakshasas, Siddhas, Punnagas, Kiishmaridas, 
Pisachas, Gandharbas, men, animals, deer, elephants, reptiles, trees, shrubs, 
creepers, climbers, and grasses; all things, large, middling, small, immense, or 
minute: thou art all bodies whatsoever, composed of aggregated atoms. This thy 
illusion beguiles all who are ignorant of thy true nature, the fools who imagine 
soul to be in that which is not spirit. The notions that "I am—this is mine," which 
influence mankind, are but the delusions of the mother of the world, originating 
in thy active agency. Those men who, attentive to their duties, diligently worship 
thee, traverse all this illusion, and obtain spiritual freedom. Brahma and all the 
gods, men and animals, are alike invested by the thick darkness of fascination, in 


the gulf of the illusions of Vishnu. That men, who having worshipped thee, 
should seek the gratification of their desires, and their own preservation, this, O 
lord, is also thy delusion. It is the sport of thy fascinations that induces men to 
glorify thee, to obtain thereby the continuance of their race, or the annihilation of 
their enemies, instead of eternal liberation. It is the fault of the impure acts of the 
unrighteous (to proffer such idle requests to one able to confer such more 
important benefits), like asking for a rag to cover one's nakedness from the tree 
that bestows whatever is solicited. Be propitious then, imperishable author of all 
the error that deceives the world; and dispel, O lord of all creatures, the conceit 
of knowledge, which proceeds from ignorance. Glory to thee, grasper of the 
discus, wielder of the bow, brandisher of the mace, holder of the shell; for such 
do I behold thee in thy perceptible form: nor do I know that form of thine, which 
is beyond perception! Have compassion on me, supreme god." 

Vishnu, thus hymned by Aditi, smiled, and said to the mother of the gods, 
"Mother goddess, do thou shew favour unto me, and grant me thy blessing." "So 
be it," replied Aditi, "ever as thou wilt; and whilst thou dwellest amongst 
mortals, the first of men, thou shalt be invincible by gods or demons." Then 
Satyabhama, accompanied by the queen of Indra, addressed Aditi respectfully, 
and solicited her benedictions: and Aditi in reply said to her, "Fair-browed dame, 
thou shalt never suffer decay, nor loss of beauty: thou shalt be the asylum of all 
loveliness, dame of faultless shape." With the assent of Aditi, Indra then 
respectfully saluted Janarddana in all due form, and conducted him and 
Satyabhama through Nandana and other pleasant gardens of the gods; where 
Kesava, the destroyer of Kesi, saw the Parijata tree, the favourite of Sachi, which 
was produced when the ocean was churned for ambrosia: the bark was of gold, 
and it was embellished with young sprouting leaves of a copper colour, and fruit- 
stalks bearing numerous clusters of fragrant fruit. When Satyabhama noticed this 
tree, she said to her beloved lord, Govinda, "Why should not this divine tree be 
transported to Dwaraka? If what you say is true, and I am really dear to you, then 
let this tree be taken away from hence, and planted in the gardens of my 
dwelling. You have often said to me, 'Neither Jambavati nor Rukmini is so dear 
to me, Satya, as you are.' If you have spoken the truth, and not mere flattery, then 
let this Parijata tree be the ornament of my mansion. I long to shine amidst my 
fellow queens, wearing the flowers of this tree in the braids of my hair." 


Thus solicited by Satyabhama, Hari smiled upon her, and taking the Parijata 



plant, put it upon Garuda. The keepers of the garden remonstrated, and said, 
"This Parijata tree belongs to Sachi, the queen of the sovereign of the gods: it is 
not proper, Govinda, for you to remove it. At the time when the ocean was 
churned for the beverage of immortality, this tree was produced, for the purpose 
of providing Sachi with flowery ornaments. You cannot be suffered to depart 
with it. It is through ignorance that this is sought for by any one, as it is the 
especial property of her on whose countenance the king of the gods delights to 
look; and who shall go away with impunity, who attempts to carry it off? 
Assuredly the king of the gods will punish this audacity; for his hand launches 
the thunderbolt, and the immortals attend upon his steps. Forbear then, Krishna, 
nor provoke the hostility of all the gods. The wise will not commence actions 
that can be productive only of unpleasant consequences." Satyabhama, on 
hearing these words, was exceedingly offended, and said, "What right has Sachi- 
-what has Indr a—to the Parijata tree? it was produced at the churning of the 
ocean as the common property of all worlds. Wherefore, gods, should Indra 
alone possess it? In the same manner, guardians of the grove, as nectar, as the 
moon, as the goddess Sri herself, so the Parijata tree is the common property of 
all the world: and since Sachi, confiding in the strength of her husband's arm, 
would keep it to herself, away with submission to her: Satya takes away the tree. 
Go quickly, and let Paulomi be told what I have said: repeat to her this 
contemptuous message from Satyabhama; 'If you are the beloved wife of your 
lord, if your husband is obedient to your authority, let him prevent my husband 
from carrying off this tree. I know your husband Sakra; I know the sovereign of 
the divinities; and I, who am a mortal, take this Parijata tree away from you.'" 

Accordingly the warders of the garden went and reported to Sachi the message 
of Satyabhama. Sachi appealed to her husband, and excited the king of the gods 
to resent this affront: and Indra accordingly, attended by the army of the 
celestials, marched to attack Hari, in defence of the Parijata tree. The gods were 
armed with clubs, swords, maces, and darts; and Indra wielded the thunderbolt. 
As soon as Govinda saw the king of the gods advancing against him on his 
elephant, attended by the immortals, he blew his shell so that the sound filled all 
the regions, and he showered smilingly myriads of arrows upon his assailants. 
Beholding the air in all directions overspread with his darts, the celestials in 
return hurled innumerable missiles; but every one of these the destroyer of 
Madhu, and lord of all worlds, cut playfully into a thousand pieces with his 
shafts. The devourer of serpents, Garuda, laid hold of the noose of the sovereign 



of the waters, and tore it to fragments with his beak, as if it had been a little 
snake. The son of Devaki threw his mace at the club of Yama, and cast it broken 
upon the ground: he cut in bits the litter of the lord of wealth with his discus: a 
glance of his eye eclipsed the radiance of the sun: he severed Agni into a 
hundred parts with his arrows, and scattered the Vasus through the realms of 
space: with his discus he cut off the points of the tridents of the Rudras, and cast 
themselves upon the earth: and with the shafts shot from his bow he dispersed 
the Sadhyas, Viswas, Maruts, and Gandharbas, like fleeces of cotton from the 
pods of the Simel tree, through the sky. Garuda also diligently plied his beak and 
wings and nails, and bit and bruised and scratched the deities who opposed his 
lord. 

Then the king of the gods and the foe of Madhu encountered and overwhelmed 
each other with countless shafts, like rain-drops falling from two heavy clouds. 
Garuda in the conflict engaged with Airavata, and Janarddana was opposed to all 
the deities. When all the other weapons had been cut to pieces, Indra stood 
armed with his thunderbolt, and Krishna with the discus Sudarsana. Beholding 
them thus prepared for fight, all the people of the three spheres exclaimed, 
"Alas! alas!" Indra launched his bolt, but in vain, for Hari caught and arrested it: 
he forbore, however, to hurl his discus, and only called out to Indra to stay. 
Satyabhama seeing Indra disarmed, and his elephant disabled by Garuda, and the 
deity himself about to retreat, said to him, "King of the triple sphere, it ill 
becomes the husband of Sachi to run away. Ornamented with Parijata garlands, 
she will approach you. Of what use is the sovereignty of heaven, embellished 
with the Parijata tree, no longer beholding Sachi meet you with affection as of 
yore? Nay, Sakra, fly not; you must not suffer shame: here, take the Parijata tree; 
let the gods be no longer annoyed. Sachs, inflated with pride of her husband, has 
not welcomed me to her dwelling with respectful presents. As a woman, I am 
light of purpose, and am anxious for my husband's fame; therefore have I 
instigated, Sakra, this contest with you. But I do not want the Parijata tree, nor 
do I wish to take that which is another's property. Sachi is proud of her beauty. 
What woman is not proud of her husband?" Thus spoken to by Satyabhama, the 
king of the gods turned back, and said to her, "Desist, wrathful dame, from 
afflicting your friend by further reproaches. I am not ashamed of being 
vanquished by him who is the author of the creation, preservation, and 
destruction of the world; who is the substance of all things; in whom, without 
beginning or middle, the universe is comprised; and from whom, and by whom, 



identical with all things, it proceeds, and will cease to be. What disgrace is it, O 
goddess, to any one to be discomfited by him who is the cause of creation, 
continuance, and dissolution? His form is the parent of all worlds, though 
infinitely subtle, and known to those only by whom all that may be known is 
known. Who is able to overcome the unborn, unconstituted, eternal lord, who 
has willed to become a mortal for the good of the world?" 


Footnotes 

01. The Bhagavata merely says, "Incited by his wife, Krishna took away the 
Parijata tree, having subdued the gods, and planted it in the garden of 
Satyabhama." The Hari V. makes a long story of it, and tells it with some 
variations, especially in the commencement; Satyabhama's desire for the 
Parijata tree having been excited by Narada's presenting a flower from it 
to Krishna's other spouse, Rukmini. 




31. Chapter 


Krishna, with Indra's consent, takes the Parijata tree to Dwaraka; marries the 

princesses rescued from Naraka. 

KESAVA, being thus eulogized by the king of the gods, smiled, and spake 
gravely to him in reply. "Thou art Indra," said he, "the king of the celestials: we 
are but mortals, O lord of the world: thou must pardon therefore the offence that 
I have committed. Let this Parijata tree be taken to its appropriate situation. I 
removed it in compliance with the words of Satya. Receive back also this your 
thunderbolt, cast at me; for this is your proper weapon, the destroyer of your 
foes." Indra answered and said, "Thou beguilest us, O lord, in calling thyself a 
mortal; but we know thee to be the lord, although not endowed with subtlety of 
discernment. Thou art that thou art, engaged in the active preservation of the 
earth; thou extractest the thorns implanted in her bosom, destroyer of the demon 
race. Let this Parijata tree be transferred to Dwaraka, and it shall remain upon 
earth as long as thou abidest in the world of mortals." Hari, having assented to 
the proposal of Indra, returned to earth, hymned by attendant sages, saints, and 
quiristers of heaven. 

When Krishna arrived over Dwaraka, he blew his shell, and delighted all the 
inhabitants with the sound. Then alighting from Garuda, he proceeded with 
Satyabhama to her garden, and there planted the great Parijata tree, the smell of 
which perfumed the earth for three furlongs, and an approach to which enabled 
every one to recollect the events of a prior existence; so that, on beholding their 
faces in that tree, all the Yadavas contemplated themselves in their (original) 
celestial forms. Then Krishna took possession of the wealth, elephants, horses, 
and women, which he had recovered from Naraka, and which had been brought 
to Dwaraka by the servants of the demon; and at an auspicious season he 
espoused all the maidens whom Naraka had carried off from their friends; at one 
and the same moment he received the hands of all of them, according to the 
ritual, in separate mansions. Sixteen thousand and one hundred was the number 
of the maidens, and into so many different forms did the foe of Madhu multiply 
himself; so that every one of the damsels thought that he had wedded her in his 
single person; and the creator of the world, Hari, the assumer of universal shape, 


abode severally in the dwelling of each of these his wives. 



32. Chapter 


Children of Krishna. Usha, the daughter of Bana, sees Aniruddha in a dream, 

and becomes enamoured of him. 

PARASARA.—I have enumerated to you Pradyumna and the other sons of 
Rukmini. Satyabhama bore Bhanu and Bhairika. The sons of Rohini were 
Diptimat, Tamrapakshi, and others. The powerful Samba and other sons were 
born of Jambavati. Bhadravinda and other valiant youths were the sons of 
Nagnajiti. Saivya (or Mitravinda) had several sons, of whom Sangramajit was 
the chief. Vrika and others were begotten by Hari on Madri. Lakshmana had 
Gatravat and others: and Sruta and others were the sons of Kalindi. Krishna had 
sons also by his other wives, in all one hundred and eighty thousand. The eldest 
of the whole was Pradyumna, the son of Rukmini: his son was Aniruddha, from 
whom Vraja was born: his mother was Usha, the daughter of Bana, and grand¬ 
daughter of Bali, whom Aniruddha won in war. On that occasion a fierce battle 
took place between Hari and Sankara, in which the thousand arms of Bana were 
lopped away by the discus of the former. 

MAITREYA.—HOW happened it, venerable Brahman, that a contest on account 
of Usha arose between Siva and Krishna? and in what manner did Hari cut off 
the thousand arms of Bana? This, illustrious sir, thou art able to narrate. 

PARASARA.—Usha, the daughter of Bana, having seen Parvati sporting with her 
lord, Sambhu, was inspired with a wish for similar dalliance. The beautiful 
Gauri, who knows the hearts of all, said to Usha, "Do not grieve; you shall have 
a husband." "But when will this be?" thought Usha to herself, "or who will be 
my lord?" On which Parvati continued; "He who shall appear to you, princess, in 
a dream on the twelfth lunation of the light half of Vaisakha, he will be your 
husband." Accordingly, as the goddess had foretold, on that lunar day a youth 
appeared to Usha in a dream, of whose person she became enamoured. When she 
woke, and no longer perceived him, she was overcome with sorrow, and, 
unrestrained by modesty, demanded of her companion whither he had gone. The 
companion and friend of the princess was Chitralekha, the daughter of 
Kubhanda, the minister of Bana. "Of whom do you speak?" inquired she of 


Usha. But the princess, recollecting herself, was ashamed, and remained silent. 
At length, however, Chitralekha conciliated her confidence, and she related to 
her what had passed, and what the goddess had foretold; and she requested her 
friend to devise some means of uniting her with the person whom she had beheld 
in her dream. 

Chitralekha then delineated the most eminent gods, demons, spirits, and mortals, 
and shewed them to Usha. Putting aside the portraits of gods, spirits, snake-gods, 
and demons, the princess selected those of mortals, and amongst them the heroes 
of the races of Andhaka and Vrishni. When she came to the likenesses of 
Krishna and Rama, she was confused with shame; from the portrait of 
Pradyumna she modestly averted her eyes; but the moment she beheld the 
picture of his son, the object of her passion, her eyes wide expanded, and all her 
bashfulness was discarded. "This is he! this is he!" said she to Chitralekha; and 
her friend, who was endowed with magic power, bade her be of good cheer, and 
set off through the air to Dwaraka. 


Footnotes 

01. The Bhagavata says, each of his eight queens had ten sons, and gives the 
ten names of each set, with one or two exceptions. 




33. Chapter 


Bana solicits Siva for war: finds Aniruddha in the palace, and makes him 
prisoner. Krishna, Balarama, and Pradyumna come to his rescue Siva and 
Skanda aid Bana: the former is disabled; the latter put to flight. Bana encounters 
Krishna, who cuts off all his arms, and is about to put him to death. Siva 
intercedes, and Krishna a spares his life. Vishnu and Siva are the same. 

BEFORE this took place, Bana had been engaged in the adoration of the three¬ 
eyed god, and had thus prayed to him: "I am humiliated, O lord, by the 
possession of a thousand arms in a state of peace; let some hostilities ensue, in 
which I may derive some advantage from their possession. Without war, what is 
the use of these arms? they are but a burden to me." Sankara replied, "When thy 
peacock banner shall be broken, thou shalt have war, the delight of the evil 
spirits that feast on the flesh of man." Bana, pleased by this promise, proffered 
his thanks to Sambhu, and returned to his palace, where he found his standard 
broken; at which his joy was increased. 

At that time the nymph Chitralekha returned from Dwaraka, and by the exercise 
of her magic power brought Aniruddha along with her. The guards of the inner 
apartments discovering him there with Usha, reported it to the king who 
immediately sent a body of his followers to seize the prince; but the valiant 
youth, taking up an iron club, slew his assailants: on which Bana mounted his 
car, advanced against him, and endeavoured to put him to death. Finding, 
however, that Aniruddha was not to be subdued by prowess, he followed the 
counsel of his minister, and brought his magical faculties into the conflict, by 
which he succeeded in capturing the Yadu prince, and binding him in serpent 
bonds. 

When Aniruddha was missed from Dwaravati, and the Yadavas were inquiring 
of one another whither he had gone, Narada came to them, and told them that he 
was the prisoner of Bana, having been conveyed by a female, possessed of 
magic faculties, to Sonitapura When they heard this, they were satisfied; for they 
had imagined he had been taken away by the gods (in reprisal for the Parijata 
tree). Krishna therefore immediately summoned Garuda, who came with a wish; 


and mounting upon him, along with Bala and Pradyumna, he set off for the city 
of Bana. On their approach to the city they were opposed by the spirits who 
attend on Rudra, but these were soon destroyed by Hari, and he and his 
companions reached the vicinity of the town. Here mighty Fever, an emanation 
from Maheswara, having three feet and three heads, fought desperately with 
Vishnu in defence of Bana. Baladeva, upon whom his ashes were scattered, was 
seized with burning heat, and his eyelids trembled: but he obtained relief by 
clinging to the body of Krishna. Contending thus with the divine holder of the 
bow, the Fever emanating from Siva was quickly expelled from the person of 
Krishna by Fever which he himself engendered. Brahma beholding the 
impersonated malady bewildered by the beating inflicted by the arms of the 
deity, entreated the latter to desist; and the foe of Madhu refrained, and absorbed 
into himself the fever he had created. The rival Fever then departed, saying to 
Krishna, "Those men who call to memory the combat between us shall be ever 
exempt from febrile disease." 

Next Vishnu overcame and demolished the five fires, and with perfect ease 
annihilated the army of the Danavas. Then the son of Bali (Bana), with the 
whole of the Daitya host, assisted by Sankara and Kartikeya, fought with Sauri. 
A fierce combat took place between Hari and Sankara; all the regions shook, 
scorched by their flaming weapons, and the celestials felt assured that the end of 
the universe was at hand. Govinda, with the weapon of yawning, set Sankara a- 
gape; and then the demons and the demigods attendant upon Siva were destroyed 
on every side; for Hara, overcome with incessant gaping, sat down in his car, and 
was unable longer to contend with Krishna, whom no acts affect. The deity of 
war, Kartikeya, wounded in the arm by Garuda, struck by the weapons of 
Pradyumna, and disarmed by the shout of Hari, took to flight. Bana, when he 
saw Sankara disabled, the Daityas destroyed, Guha fled, and Siva's followers 
slain, advanced on his vast car, the horses of which were harnessed by Nandisa, 
to encounter Krishna and his associates Bala and Pradyumna. The valiant 
Balabhadra, attacking the host of Bana, wounded them in many ways with his 
arrows, and put them to a shameful rout; and their sovereign beheld them 
dragged about by Rama with his ploughshare, or beaten by him with his club, or 
pierced by Krishna with his arrows: he therefore attacked Krishna, and a fight 
took place between them: they cast at each other fiery shafts, that pierced 
through their armour; but Krishna intercepted with his arrows those of Bana, and 
cut them to pieces. Bana nevertheless wounded Kesava, and the wielder of the 



discus wounded Bana; and both desirous of victory, and seeking enraged the 
death of his antagonist, hurled various missiles at each other. When an infinite 
number of arrows had been cut to pieces, and the weapons began to be 
exhausted, Krishna resolved to put Bana to death. The destroyer of the demon 
host therefore took up his discus Sudarsana, blazing with the radiance of a 
hundred suns. As he was in the act of casting it, the mystical goddess Kotavi, the 
magic lore of the demons, stood naked before him. Seeing her before him, 
Krishna, with unclosed eyes, cast Sudarsana, to cut off the arms of Bana. The 
discus, dreaded in its flight by the whole of the weapons of the demons, lopped 
off successively the numerous arms of the Asura. Beholding Krishna with the 
discus again in his hand, and preparing to launch it once more, for the total 
demolition of Bana, the foe of Tripura (Siva) respectfully addressed him. The 
husband of Uma, seeing the blood streaming from the dissevered arms of Bana, 
approached Govinda, to solicit a suspension of hostilities, and said to him, 
"Krishna, Krishna, lord of the world, I know thee, first of spirits, the supreme 
lord, infinite felicity, without beginning or end, and beyond all things. This sport 
of universal being, in which thou takest the persons of god, animals, and men, is 
a subordinate attribute of thy energy. Be propitious therefore, O lord, unto me. I 
have given Bana assurance of safety; do not thou falsify that which I have 
spoken. He has grown old in devotion to me; let him not incur thy displeasure. 
The Daitya has received a boon from me, and therefore I deprecate thy wrath." 
When he had concluded, Govinda, dismissing his resentment against the Asura, 
looked graciously on the lord of Uma, the wielder of the trident, and said to him, 
"Since you, Sankara, have given a boon unto Bana, let him live: from respect to 
your promises, my discus is arrested: the assurance of safety granted by you is 
granted also by me. You are fit to apprehend that you are not distinct from me. 
That which I am, thou art; and that also is this world, with its gods, demons, and 
mankind. Men contemplate distinctions, because they are stupified by 
ignorance." So saying, Krishna went to the place where the son of Pradyumna 
was confined. The snakes that bound him were destroyed, being blasted by the 
breath of Garuda: and Krishna, placing him, along with his wife, upon the 
celestial bird, returned with Pradyumna and Rama to Dwaraka. 


Footnotes 


' _ r r ' 

01. The synonymes of Sonitapura in the Trikanda Sesha are Devikota, 

Banapur, Kotivarsham, and Ushavana. The first is usually considered to 
be the modern Devicotta in the Carnatic, which is commonly believed to 
be the scene of Bana's defeat. The name, however, occurs in other parts 
of India; in the Dekhin, on the banks of the Godavari, according to 
Wilford the capital of Munja (As. Res. IX. 199); and in Asam, near 
Gwalpara, as the city of the Daityas. As. Res. XIV. 443 Hamilton notices 
the remains of a city so called in Dinajpur. In the Kalika P., Bana is 
described as the friend, and apparently neighbour, of Naraka, king of 
Pragjyotish or Asam. 

02. Alluding to the three stages of febrile paroxysms, or to the recurrence of 
tertian ague. A contest with this enemy, in the course of military 
operations, is an allegory which the British armies in India too often 
illustrate. 

03. The Ahavaniya, Garhapatya, Dakshina, Sabhya, and Avasathya, are the 
five fires; of which the three first have a religious, and the other two a 
secular character. The first is a fire prepared for oblations at an 
occasional sacrifice: the second is the household fire, to be perpetually 
maintained: the third is a sacrificial fire, in the centre of the other two, 
and placed to the south: the Sabhya is a fire lighted to warm a party: and 

the Avasatthya the common domestic or culinary fire. Manu, III. too, 

// 

185, and Kulluka Bhatta's explanation. 

r 

04. Kotavi is said to be an eighth portion of Rudrani, and the tutelary 
goddess of the Daityas, composed of incantations. The Hari V. calls her 
also Lamba, and intimates her being the mother of Bana, and as identical 
with Durga. The word in the lexicons designates a naked woman, and is 
thence applicable to Durga, in some of her forms. 

05. There can be little doubt that this legend describes a serious struggle 
between the Saivas and Vaishnavas, in which the latter, according to their 
own report, were victorious; and the Saivas, although they attempt to 
make out a sort of compromise between Rudra and Krishna, are obliged 
to admit his having the worst of the conflict, and his inability to protect 
his votary. The Bhagavata tells the story much as the text. The Hari V. 
amplifies even more than usual, the narrative occupying nearly seventy 
pages of the French translation. The legend is to be found to the same 
purport, but in various degrees of detail, in the Agni P., Kurma R, Padma 
P. (Uttara Khanda), Vamana P., and Brahma Vaivartta P. (Krishna Janma 


Kharida) 




34. Chapter 


Pauridraka, a Vasudeva, assumes the insignia and style of Krishna, supported by 
the king of Kasi. Krishna marches against, and destroys them. The son of the 
king sends a magical being against Krishna: destroyed by his discus, which also 
sets Benares on fire, and consumes it and its inhabitants. 

MAITREYA.—Of a truth the divine Sauri, having assumed a mortal body, 
performed great achievements in his easy victories over Sakra and Siva, and all 
their attendant divinities. I am now desirous to hear from you, illustrious sage, 
what other mighty exploit the humiliator of the prowess of the celestials 
performed. 

PARASARA.—Hear, excellent Brahman, with reverent attention, an account of 
the burning of Varanasi by Krishna, in the course of his relieving the burdens of 
the earth. 

There was a Vasudeva who was called Pauridraka, and who, though not the 
Vasudeva, was flattered by ignorant people as the descended deity, until he 
fancied himself to be the Vasudeva who had come down upon earth. Losing all 
recollection of his real character, he assumed the emblems of Vishnu, and sent an 
ambassador to the magnanimous Krishna with this message; "Relinquish, thou 
foolish fellow, the discus; lay aside all my insignia, my name, and the character 
of Vasudeva; and come and do me homage; and I will vouchsafe thee means of 
subsistence." At which Janarddana laughed, and replied, "Go, messenger, back to 
Pauridraka, and say to him from me, 'I will dispatch to thee my emblem the 
discus without fail. Thou wilt rightly apprehend my meaning, and consider what 
is to be done; for I shall come to thy city, bringing the discus with me, and shall 
undoubtedly consign it to thee. If thou wilt command me to come, I will 
immediately obey, and be with thee to-morrow; there shall be no delay: and, 
having sought thy asylum, I will so provide, O king, that I shall never more have 
any thing to dread from thee.'" So saying, he dismissed the, ambassador to report 
these words to his sovereign; and summoning Garuda, mounted him, and set off 
for the city of Pauridraka. 


When the king of Kasi heard of the preparations of Kesava, he sent his army (to 
the aid of Paundraka), himself bringing up the rear; and with the force of the 
king of Kasi, and his own troops, Paundraka, the false Vasudeva, marched to 
meet Krishna. Hari beheld him afar off, standing in his car, holding a discus, a 
club, a mace, a scimitar, and a lotus, in his hands; ornamented with a garland of 
flowers; bearing a bow; and having his standard made of gold: he had also the 
Srivatsa mark delineated on his breast; he was dressed in yellow garments, and 
decorated with earrings and a tiara. When the god whose standard is Garuda 
beheld him, he laughed with a deep laugh, and engaged in conflict with the 
hostile host of cavalry and elephants, fighting with swords, scimitars, maces, 
tridents, spears, and bows. Showering upon the enemy the shafts from his 
Saranga bow, and hurling at them his mace and discus, he quickly destroyed 
both the army of Paundraka and that of the king of Kasi. He then said to the 
former, who was foolishly wearing his emblems, "Paundraka, you desired me by 
your envoy to resign to you all my insignia. I now deliver them to you. Here is 
my discus; here I give up my mace; and here is Garuda, let him mount upon thy 
standard." Thus speaking, he let fly the discus and the mace, by which 
Paundraka was cut to pieces, and cast on the ground; whilst the Garuda on his 
banner was demolished by the Garuda of Vishnu. The people, beholding this 
sight, exclaimed, "Alas! alas!" but the valiant king of Kasi, adhering to the 
imposture of his friend, continued the conflict, till Sauri decapitated him with his 
arrows, shooting his head into the city of Kasi, to the marvel of all the 
inhabitants. Having thus slain Paundraka and the king of Kasi, with all their 
followers, Sauri returned to Dwaraka, where he lived in the enjoyment of 
heavenly delights. 

When the inhabitants of Kasi saw the head of their king shot into their city, they 
were much astonished, and wondered how it could have happened, and by whom 
the deed could have been done. Having ascertained that the king had been killed 
by Krishna, the son of the monarch of Kasi, together with the priest of the 
family, propitiated Sankara; and that deity, well pleased to be adored in the 
sacred place Avimukta, desired the prince to demand a boon: on which he 
prayed, and said, "O lord, mighty god, through thy favour let thy mystic spirit 
arise to destroy Krishna, the murderer of my father." "It shall be so," answered 
Sankara: and from out of the southern fire upsprang a vast and formidable 
female, like flame out of fire, blazing with ruddy light, and with fiery radiance 
streaming amidst her hair. Angrily she called upon Krishna, and departed to 



Dwaraka; where the people, beholding her, were struck with dismay, and fled for 
protection to Madhusudana, the refuge of all worlds. The wielder of the discus 
knowing that the fiend had been produced by the son of the king of Kasi, 
through his adoration of the deity whose emblem is a bull, and being engaged in 
sportive amusements, and playing at dice, said to the discus, "Kill this fierce 
creature, whose tresses are of plaited flame." Accordingly Sudarsana, the discus 
of Vishnu, immediately attacked the fiend, fearfully enwreathed with fire, and 
wearing tresses of plaited flame. Terrified at the might of Sudarsana, the creation 
of Maheswara awaited not his attack, but fled with speed, pursued by him with 
equal velocity, until she reached Varanasi, repelled by the superior might of the 
discus of Vishnu. 

The army of Kasi, and the host of the demigods attendant upon Siva, armed with 
all kinds of weapons, then sallied out to oppose the discus; but, skilled in the use 
of arms, he consumed the whole of the forces by his radiance, and then set fire to 
the city, in which the magic power of Siva had concealed herself. Thus was 
Varanasi burnt, with all its princes and their followers, its inhabitants, elephants, 
horses, and men, treasures and granaries, houses, palaces, and markets. The 
whole of a city, that was inaccessible to the gods, was thus wrapped in flames by 
the discus of Hari, and was totally destroyed. The discus then, with unmitigated 
wrath, and blazing fiercely, and far from satisfied with the accomplishment of so 
easy a task, returned to the hand of Vishnu. 


Footnotes 

01. From being, the commentator says, king of Pundra. The Bhagavata calls 
him chief of the Karushas; the Padma, king of Kasi; but the Bhagavata, 
as well as our text, makes the king of Kasi his friend and ally. 

02. According to the Padma P., he propitiates Siva, and obtains from him the 
insignia which constitute a Vasudeva. The different authorities for this 
legend all use the term Vasudeva in the sense of a title. 

03. The Hari V. and Padma P. send Paundraka to Dwaraka. According to the 
latter, Narada incites Paundraka to the aggression, telling him he cannot 
be a Vasudeva till he has overcome Krishna: he goes, and is killed. The 


former work, as usual, enters into particulars of its own invention. 
Krishna is absent on a visit to Siva at Kailasa, and during his absence 
Paundraka, assisted by Ekalavya, king of the Nishadas, makes a night 
attack upon Dwaraka. They are resisted by the Yadavas under Satyaki 
and Balarama; by the former of whom Paundraka is repeatedly 
overthrown, and all but slain: he requires so much killing, however, that 
he is likely to obtain the victory, when Krishna conies to the aid of his 
kinsmen, and after a protracted encounter, described in language 
employed a hundred times before, kills his competitor. The whole of the 
sections called the Kailasa Yatra, or Krishna's journey to Kailasa, must 
have been wanting in the copy used by M. Langlois, as they are not 
included in his translation. The chapters of the Hari V. according to his 
enumeration of them are 261: my copy has 316. 

04. The Bhagavata names him Sudakshina; the Padma, Daridapani. 

05. A personified Kritya, a magical creation. The Padma has the same. The 
Bhagavata makes the product of the sacrificial fire a male, and sends him 
to Dwaraka, accompanied by a host of Bhutas, Suva's attendant goblins. 

06. According to the Bhagavata, the magical being himself destroys 
Sudakshina and his priest; but Sudarsana consumes the people and the 
city. The Padma ascribes the destruction of the king and all his city to the 
discus. The Hari V. closes its narrative with the death of Paundraka, and 
makes no mention of the destruction of Benares. The circumstance is 
alluded to in a preceding section (s. 159) by Narada, when detailing the 
exploits of Krishna. 

07. In this legend, again, we have a contest between the followers of Vishnu 
and Siva intimated, as, besides the assistance given by the latter to 
Paundraka, Benares—Varanasi or Atimukta—has been from all time, as it 
is at present, the high place of the Saiva worship. There is also an 
indication of a Vaishriava schism, in the competition between Pauridra 
and Krishna for the title of Vasudeva, and the insignia of his divinity. 




35. Chapter 


Samba carries off the daughter of Duryodhana, but is taken prisoner. Balarama 
comes to Hastinapur, and demands his liberation: it is refused: in his wrath he 
drags the city towards him, to throw it into the river. The Kuru chiefs give up 
Samba and his wife. 

MAITREYA.—I have a great desire to hear, excellent Brahman, some further 
account of the exploits of Balarama. You have related to me his dragging the 
Yamuna, and other mighty deeds, but you can tell me, venerable sir, some other 
of his acts. 

PARASARA.—Attend, Maitreya, to the achievements performed by Rama, who 
is the eternal, illimitable Sesha, the upholder of the earth. At the choice of a 
husband by the daughter of Duryodhana, the princess was carried off by the hero 
Samba, the son of Jambavati. Being pursued by Duryodhana, Kama, Bhishma, 
Drona, and other celebrated chiefs, who were incensed at his audacity, he was 
defeated, and taken prisoner. When the Yadavas heard of the occurrence, their 
wrath was kindled against Duryodhana and his associates, and they prepared to 
take up arms against them; but Baladeva, in accents interrupted by the effects of 
ebriety, forbade them, and said, "I will go alone to the sons of Kuru; they will 
liberate Samba at my request." Accordingly he went to the elephant-styled city 
(Hastinapur), but took up his abode in a grove without the town, which he did 
not enter. When Duryodhana and the rest heard that he had arrived there, they 
sent him a cow, a present of fruits and flowers, and water. Bala received the 
offering in the customary form, and said to the Kauravas, "Ugrasena commands 
you to set Samba at liberty." When Duryodhana, Kama, Bhishma, Drona, and 
the others, heard this, they were very angry; and Bahlika and other friends of the 
Kauravas, who looked upon the Yadu race as not entitled to regal dignity, said to 
the wielder of the club, "What is this, Balabhadra, that thou hast uttered? What 
Yadava shall give orders to the chiefs of the family of Kum? If Ugrasena issues 
his mandates to the Kauravas, then we must take away the white umbrella that 
he has usurped, and which is fit only for kings. Depart therefore, Balarama; you 
are entitled to our respect; but Samba has been guilty of improper conduct, and 
we will not liberate him either at Ugrasena's commands or yours. The homage 


that is due to us, their superiors, by the Kukkura and Andhaka tribes, may not be 
paid by them; but who ever heard of a command issued by a servant to his 
master? Elevation to an equal seat has rendered you arrogant. We have 
committed a great mistake in neglecting, through our friendship for you, the 
policy (that teaches the danger of treating the abject with deference). Our 
sending you to-day a respectful present was an intimation of (personal) regard, 
which it was neither fit for our race to have proffered, nor for your's to have 
expected." 

Having thus spoken, the Kum chiefs, unanimously refusing to set the son of Hari 
at large, immediately returned into the city. Bala, rolling about with intoxication, 
and the wrath which their contemptuous language had excited, struck the ground 
furiously with his heel, so that it burst to pieces with a loud sound that 
reverberated through the regions of space. His eyes reddened with rage, and his 
brow was curved with frowns, as he exclaimed, "What arrogance is this, in such 
vile and pithless creatures! The sovereignty of the Kauravas, as well as our own, 
is the work of fate, whose decree it also is that they now disrespect or disobey 
the commands of Ugrasena. Indra may of right give his orders to the gods; and 
Ugrasena exercises equal authority with the lord of Sachi. Fie upon the pride that 
boasts a throne, the leavings of a hundred mortals! Is not he the sovereign of the 
earth, the wives of whose servants adorn themselves with the blossoms of the 
Parijata tree? Ugrasena shall be the undisputed king of kings; for I will not return 
to his capital until I have rid the world wholly of the sons of Kuru. I will destroy 
Kama, Duryodhana, Drona, Bhishma, Bahlika, Duhsasana, Bhurisravas, 

r r 

Somadatta, Salya, Bhima, Arjuna, Yudhishthira, the twins, and all the other vile 
descendants of Kuru, with their horses, elephants, and chariots. I will rescue the 
hero Samba from captivity, and carry him, along with his wife, to Dwaraka, 
where I shall again behold Ugrasena and the rest of my kin. Or, authorized by 
the king of the gods to remove the burdens of the earth, I will take this capital of 
the Kauravas, with all the sons of Kum, and cast the city of the elephant into the 
Bhagirathi." 

So saying, the wielder of the club, Baladeva, his eyes red with rage, plunged the 
blade of his ploughshare downwards, beneath the ramparts of the city, and drew 
them towards him. When the Kauravas beheld Hastinapura tottering, they were 
much alarmed, and called loudly on Rama, saying, "Rama, Rama! hold, hold! 
suppress your wrath! have mercy upon us! Here is Samba, and his wife also, 



delivered up to thee. Forgive our sins, committed in ignorance of thy wondrous 
power." Accordingly, issuing hurriedly from the city, the Kauravas delivered 
Samba and his bride to the mighty Balarama, who, bowing to Bhishma, Drona, 
and Kripa, who addressed him in conciliatory language, said, "I am satisfied;" 
and so desisted. The city bears the marks of the shock it received, even to the 
present day—such was the might of Rama—proving both his strength and 
prowess. The Kauravas then offering homage to Samba and to Bala, dismissed 
the former with his wife and a bridal portion. 


Footnotes 

01. This adventure is related in the Bhagavata, and very briefly noticed in the 
Hari Vansa; but I have not found any mention of it in the Mahabharata. It 
may have been suggested originally by Hastinapura having sustained 
some injury either from an earthquake or from the encroachments of the 
river, which, as is recorded, compelled the removal of the capital to 
Kausambi. 




36. Chapter 


The Asura Dwivida, in the form of an ape, destroyed by Balarama. 

HEAR also, Maitreya, another exploit performed by the mighty Balarama. The 
great Asura, the foe of the friends of the gods, Naraka, had a friend of exceeding 
prowess in the monkey named Dwivida, who was animated by implacable 
hostility against the deities, and vowed to revenge on the whole of them the 
destruction of Naraka by Krishna, at the instigation of the king of the celestials, 
by preventing sacrifices, and effecting the annihilation of the mortal sphere. 
Blinded by ignorance, he accordingly interrupted all religious rites, subverted all 
righteous observances, and occasioned the death of living beings: he set fire to 
the forests, to villages, and to towns: sometimes he overwhelmed cities and 
hamlets with falling rocks; or lifting up mountains in the waters, he cast them 
into the ocean: then taking his place amidst the deep, he agitated the waves, until 
the foaming sea rose above its confines, and swept away the villages and cities 
situated upon its shores. Dwivida also, who could assume what shape he would, 
enlarged his bulk to an immense size, and rolling and tumbling and trampling 
amidst the corn fields, he crushed and spoiled the harvests. The whole world, 
disordered by this iniquitous monkey, was deprived of sacred study and religious 
rites, and was greatly afflicted. 

On one occasion Hala.yudha was drinking in the groves of Raivata, along with 
the illustrious Revati and other beautiful females; and the distinguished Yadu, in 
whose praises songs were sung, and who was preeminent amidst graceful and 
sportive women, resembled Kuvera, the god of riches, in his palace. Whilst thus 
engaged, the monkey Dwivida came there, and stealing the ploughshare and the 
club of Baladeva, grinned at and mocked him, and laughed at the women, and 
threw over and broke the cups filled with wine. Balarama, becoming angry at 
this, threatened the monkey; but the latter disregarded his menaces, and made a 
chattering noise: on which Bala, starting up, seized his club in wrath and the 
monkey laid hold of a large rock, which he burled at the hero. Bala casting his 
club at it, as it neared him, broke it into a thousand fragments, which, together 
with the club, fell upon the ground. Beholding the club prostrate, the monkey 
sprang over it, and struck the Yadava violently on the breast with his paws. Bala 


replied with a blow of his fist upon the forehead of Dwivida, which felled him, 
vomiting blood, and lifeless, to the earth. The crest of the mountain on which he 
fell was splintered into a hundred pieces by the weight of his body, as if the 
thunderer had shivered it with his thunderbolt. The gods threw down a shower of 
flowers upon Rama, and approached him, and praised him for the glorious feat 
he had performed. "Well has the world been freed," said they, "by thy prowess, 
O hero, of this vile ape, who was the ally of the enemy of the gods." Then they 
and their attendant spirits returned well pleased to heaven. Many such inimitable 
deeds were wrought by the illustrious Baladeva, the impersonation of Sesha, the 
supporter of the earth. 




Footnotes 

01. This exploit of Balarama is also similarly, but more vulgarly, related in 
the Bhagavata. It is simply said in the Hari Vansa, and erroneously, that 
Menda and Dwivida were conquered by Krishna. 




37. Chapter 


Destruction of the Yadavas. Samba and others deceive and ridicule the Rishis. 
The former bears an iron pestle: it is broken, and thrown into the sea. The 
Yadavas go to Prabhasa by desire of Krishna: they quarrel and fight, and all 
perish. The great serpent Sesha issues from the mouth of Rama. Krishna is shot 
by a hunter, and again becomes one with universal spirit. 

IN this manner did Krishna, assisted by Baladeva, destroy demons and 
iniquitous monarchs, for the good of the earth; and along with Phalguna also did 
he relieve earth of her load, by the death of innumerable hosts. Having thus 
lightened the burdens of the earth, and slain many unrighteous princes, he 
exterminated, by the pretext of an imprecation denounced by Brahmans, his own 
Yadava race. Then quitting Dwaraka, and relinquishing his mortal being, the 
self-born reentered, with all his emanations, his own sphere of Vishnu. 

MAITREYA.—Tell me how Janarddana effected the destruction of his own race 
under the plea of Brahmanical imprecation, and in what manner he relinquished 
his mortal body. 

PARASARA.—At the holy place Pindaraka, Viswamitra, Kanwa, and the great 
sage Narada, were observed by some boys of the Yadu tribe. Giddy with youth, 
and influenced by predestined results, they dressed and adorned Sumba, the son 
of Jambavati, as a damsel, and conducting her to the sages, they addressed them 
with the usual marks of reverence, and said, "What child will this female, the 
wife of Babhru, who is anxious to have a son, give birth to?" The sages, who 
were possessed of divine wisdom, were very angry to find themselves thus 
tricked by the boys, and said, "She will bring forth a club, that shall crush the 
whole of the Yadava race." The boys, thus spoken to by the sages, went and 
related all that had occurred to Ugrasena; and, as foretold, a club was produced 
from the belly of Samba. Ugrasena had the club, which was of iron, ground to 
dust, and thrown into the sea; but the particles of dust there became rushes. 
There was one part of the iron club which was like the blade of a lance, and 
which the Andhakas could not break: this, when thrown into the sea, was 
swallowed by a fish; the fish was caught, the iron spike was extracted from its 


belly, and was taken by a hunter named Jara. The all-wise and glorious 
Madhusudana did not think fit to counteract what had been predetermined by 
fate. 

Then there came to Kesava, when he was private and alone, a messenger from 
the gods, who addressed him with reverence, and said, "I am sent to you, O lord, 
by the deities, and do thou hear what Indra, together with the Viswas, Maruts, 
Adityas, Sadhyas, and Rudras, respectfully represents. More than a hundred 
years have elapsed since thou, in favour to the gods, hast descended upon earth, 
for the purpose of relieving it of its load. The demons have been slain, and the 
burden of earth has been removed: now let the immortals once again behold their 
monarch in heaven. A period exceeding a century has passed: now, if it be thy 
pleasure, return to Swarga. This is the solicitation of the celestials. But should 
such not be thy will, then remain here as long as it may be desirable to thy 
dependants." To this Krishna replied, "All that thou hast said I am well aware of. 
The destruction of the Yadavas by me has commenced. The burdens of the earth 
are not removed until the Yadavas are extirpated. I will effect this also in my 
descent, and quickly; for it shall come to pass in seven nights. When I have 
restored the land of Dwaraka to the ocean, and annihilated the race of Yadu, I 
will proceed to the mansions of the immortals. Apprise the gods, that, having 
abandoned my human body, and accompanied by Sankarsharia, I will then return 
to them. The tyrants that oppressed the earth, Jarasandha and the rest, have been 
killed; and a youth, even of the race of Yadu, is, no less than they, an 
incumbrance. When therefore I have taken away this great weight upon earth, I 
will return to protect the sphere of the celestials. Say this to them." The 
messenger of the gods, having received this reply, bowed, and took his heavenly 
course to the king of the gods. 

The mighty Krishna now beheld signs and portents both in earth and heaven, 
prognosticating, day and night, the ruin of Dwaraka. Shewing these to the 
Yadavas, he said, "See; behold these fearful phenomena: let us hasten to 
Prabhasa, to avert these omens." When he had thus spoken to the eminent 
Yadava, the illustrious Uddhava saluted and said to him, "Tell me, O lord, what 
it is proper that I should do, for it seems to me that thou wilt destroy all this race: 
the signs that are manifest declare nothing less than the annihilation of the tribe." 
Then Krishna replied to him, "Do you go by a celestial route, which my favour 
shall provide you, to the holy place Badarikasrama, in the Gandhamadana 



mountain, the shrine of Naranarayana; and on that spot, sanctified by them, thou, 
by meditating on me, shalt obtain perfection through my favour. When the race 
of Yadu shall have perished, I shall proceed to heaven; and the ocean shall 
inundate Dwaraka, when I have quitted it." Accordingly Uddhava, thus 
instructed by Kesava, saluted him with veneration, and departed to the shrine of 
Naranarayana. 

Then the Yadavas ascended their rapid cars, and drove to Prabhasa, along with 
Krishna, Rama, and the rest of their chiefs. They bathed there, and, excited by 
Vasudeva, the Kukkuras and Andhakas indulged in liquor. As they drank, the 
destructive flame of dissension was kindled amongst them by mutual collision, 
and fed with the fuel of abuse. Infuriated by the divine influence, they fell upon 
one another with missile weapons, and when those were expended, they had 
recourse to the rushes growing nigh. The rushes in their hands became like 
thunderbolts, and they struck one another with them fatal blows. Pradyumna, 
Samba, Kritavarman, Satyaki, Aniruddha, Prithu, Viprithu, Charuvarman, 
Charuka, Akrura, and many others, struck one another with the rushes, which 
had assumed the hardness of thunderbolts. Kesava interposed to prevent them, 
but they thought that he was taking part with each severally, and continued the 
conflict. Krishna then enraged took up a handful of rushes to destroy them, and 
the rushes became a club of iron, and with this he slew many of the murderous 
Yadavas; whilst others, fighting fiercely, put an end to one another. The chariot 
of the holder of the discus, named Jaitra, was quickly carried off by the swift 
steeds, and swept away by the sea, in the sight of Daruka the charioteer. The 
discus, the club, the bow, the quiver, the shell, and the sword of Kesava, having 
circumambulated their lord, flew along the path of the sun. In a short time there 
was not a single Yadava left alive, except the mighty Krishna and Daruka. Going 
towards Rama, who was sitting at the root of a tree, they beheld a large serpent 
coming out of his mouth. Having issued from his mouth, the mighty snake 
proceeded towards the ocean, hymned by saints and by other great serpents. 
Bringing an offering of respect, Ocean came to meet him; and then the majestic 
being, adored by attendant snakes, entered into the waters of the deep. Beholding 
the departure of the spirit of Balabhadra, Kesava said to Daruka, "All this is to 
be related by you to Vasudeva and Ugrasena. Go and inform them of the 
departure of Balabhadra, and the destruction of the Yadavas; also that I shall 
engage in religious meditation, and quit this body. Apprise Ahuka and all the 
inhabitants of Dwaraka, that the sea will inundate the town: be ready therefore in 



expectation of the coming of Arjuna, and when he quits Dwaraka, no longer 
abide there, but go whithersoever that descendant of Kuru shall repair. Do you 
also go to the son of Kunti, and tell him, that it is my request that he will grant 
what protection he can to all my family. Then depart with Arjuna and all the 
people of Dwaravati, and let Vajra be installed sovereign over the tribe of Yadu." 

Daruka, being thus instructed, prostrated himself again and again before 
Krishna, and walked round him repeatedly, and then departed as he had been 
desired; and having conducted Arjuna to Dwaravati, the intelligent servant of 
Krishna established Vajra as king. The divine Govinda then, having concentrated 
in himself that supreme spirit which is one with Vasudeva, was identified with 
all beings. Respecting the words of the Brahman, the imprecation of Durvasas, 
the illustrious Krishna sat engaged in thought, resting his foot upon his knee. 
Then came there a hunter, named Jara, whose arrow was tipped with a blade 
made of the piece of iron of the club, which had not been reduced to powder; 
and beholding from a distance the foot of Krishna, he mistook it for part of a 
deer, and shooting his arrow, lodged it in the sole. Approaching his mark, he saw 
the four-armed king, and, falling at his feet, repeatedly besought his forgiveness, 
exclaiming, "I have done this deed unwittingly, thinking I was aiming at a deer! 
Have pity upon me, who am consumed by my crime; for thou art able to 
consume me!" Bhagavat replied, "Fear not thou in the least. Go, hunter, through 
my favour, to heaven, the abode of the gods." As soon as he had thus spoken, a 
celestial car appeared, and the hunter, ascending it, forthwith proceeded to 
heaven. Then the illustrious Krishna, having united himself with his own pure, 
spiritual, inexhaustible, inconceivable, unborn, undecaying, imperishable, and 
universal spirit, which is one with Vasudeva, abandoned his mortal body and the 
condition of the threefold qualities. 


Footnotes 

01. A name of Arjuna, the great friend of Krishna, to whom the latter served 
as charioteer in the war between the Pandus and Kurus. 

02. With Balarama, Pradyumna, Aniruddha, and the rest. 

03. The legend of the destruction of the Yadava race, and the death of 


Krishna, appears probably in its earliest extant form in the Mausala Parva 
of the Mahabharata. It forms the narrative portion of the eleventh book of 
the Bhagavata, having been previously briefly adverted to in the first and 
third books; and it is summarily told in the Uttara Kharida of the Padma 
P. 

04. The village of Piridaraka, still held in veneration, is situated in Guzerat, 
about twenty miles from the north-west extremity of the Peninsula. 
Hamilton, II. 664. 

05. The term is Eraka, which is explained in some medical lexicons, 'a kind 
of grass.' The commentator also calls it a kind of grass: and in the text of 
the Mahabharata the term subsequently used, and as synonymous with it, 
is Triha, 'grass.' The Mahabharata, when describing the affray which 
follows, mentions that the grass or rushes, on being plucked by Krishna 
and the Yadavas, turn to clubs. The text, and that of the Bhagavata, here 
say, that the powdered particles, floating on the sea, became rushes; or 
the latter may imply, that they fastened upon grass or weeds. The 
commentator, however, explains that the particles of iron being borne to 
land, they were so transformed. The Mahabharata says nothing of the 
piece which could not be pounded, and this seems to be an 
embellishment either of our text or the Bhagavata. The Mahabharata, 
however, adds another precaution, which the two others have left 
unnoticed. Ugrasena causes a proclamation to be made, that none of the 
inhabitants of Dwaraka shall thenceforth drink wine, on pain of being 
impaled alive: and the people for some time observe the prohibition. 

06. Nothing of this kind occurs in the Mahabharata: our text therefore offers 
an embellishment. The Bhagavata, again, improves upon the text; for, not 
content with a messenger, it makes Brahma with the Prajapatis, Siva with 
the Bhutas, Indra with the other divinities, all come in person; indicating 
evidently a later date, as plainly as the addition of the text shews it to be 
subsequent to the date of the legend in the Mahabharata. 

07. The Mahabharata, which delights in describing portents and signs, does 
not fail to detail them here. A dreadful figure, death personified, haunts 
every house, coming and going no one knows how, and being 
invulnerable to the weapons by which he is assailed. Strong hurricanes 
blow; large rats multiply, and infest the roads and houses, and attack 
persons in their sleep; Sarikas, or starlings, utter inauspicious screams in 
their cages; storks imitate the hooting of owls, and goats the howling of 


jackals; cows bring forth foals, and camels mules; food, in the moment of 
being eaten, is filled with worms; fire burns with discoloured flames; and 
at sunset and sunrise the air is traversed by headless and hideous spirits. 
There is more to the same effect, which neither our text nor the 
Bhagavata has ventured to detail. The whole passage has been published 
in Maurice's Ancient History of Hindustan, II. 463; translated apparently 
by the late Sir Charles Wilkins. The names have been much disfigured 
either by the copyist or compositor. 

08. In the Mahabharata it is said merely that Uddhava, who was versed in 
Yoga, foreseeing the destruction of the Yadavas, went away; that is, 
according to the commentator, he practised penance, and went to heaven. 
The Bhagavata, taking the hint, makes much more of it than our text, and 
expands it into a long course of instruction given by Krishna to Uddhava, 
occupying 150 leaves. 

09. By sending the Yadavas to Prabhasa, the commentator asserts, Krishna 
prevented purposely the Yadavas from obtaining Mukti, 'final liberation,' 
which would have been the consequence of dying at Dwaraka. Death at 
Prabhasa conferred only Indra's heaven. 

10. The Mahabharata describes them as going forth with horses, elephants, 
and cars, and their women, and abundance of good cheer, and varieties of 
wine and meat. 

11. The Bhagavata, like the text, adverts only in this general manner to the 
conflict; but the Mahabharata gives the particulars. Yuyudhana 
reproaches Kritavarman with having aided Aswatthaman in his night 
attack on the Paridu camp, and killing warriors in their sleep. Pradyumna 
joins in the abuse. Kritavarman retorts. Krishna looks at him angrily. 
Satyaki repeats the story of the Syamantaka gem, by which he accuses 
Kritavarman of being an accomplice in the murder of Satrajit. 
Satyabhama, the daughter of the latter, then mixes in the quarrel, and 
incites Krishna to avenge her; but Satyaki anticipates him, and murders 
Kritavarman. Saineya and the Bhojas attack Satyaki; the Andhakas 
defend him; and the affray becomes general. Krishna attempts to part the 
combatants, until Pradyumna is killed; and then taking up a handful of 
rushes, which become an iron club, he kills indiscriminately all that come 
in his way. The conflict continues until the greater part of the combatants 
have fallen, including all Krishna's sons, and he then in wrath sweeps off 
all the survivors, except Babhru and Daruka, with his discus. 


12. The Mahabharata, as observed at the end of the last note, adds Babhru, 
but it presently gets rid of him. Krishna sends him to take care of the old 
people, the women, and children, in Dwaraka, whilst Daruka goes to 
bring Arjuna to their aid: but as he goes along, overcome with grief for 
the loss of his kindred, and approaching separation from Krishna, he is 
killed by a club that is cast from a snare or trap set by a hunter. Krishna 
then goes to Dwaraka, and desires Vasudeva to await the coming of 
Arjuna; after which he returns to Rama, and sees the phenomenon 
described in the text; the serpent being Sesha, of whom Balarama was the 
incarnation. The Bhagavata does not mention this incident, merely 
observing that Rama, by the power of Yoga, returned into himself; that is, 
into Vishnu. 

13. The women, the elders, and the children, amongst whom, as we shall 
presently see, was Vajra, the son of Aniruddha, who was established as 
chief of the Yadavas at Indraprastha, and who therefore escaped the 
destruction which overwhelmed their kinsmen, the Vrishriis, Kukkuras, 
and Andhakas, of Dwaraka. This was a fortunate reservation for the 
tribes which in various parts of Hindustan, both on the Ganges and in the 
Dakhin, profess to derive their origin from the Yadavas. 

14. The process is explained by the commentator: 'By the force of Dhyana, 
or abstraction, Krishna satisfies himself that he is Brahma, or universal 
spirit; and is next convinced that he is therefore all things; by which his 
individuality ceases.' 

15. The story is told in the Mahabharata, Durvasas was on one occasion 
hospitably entertained by Krishna, but the latter omitted to wipe away the 
fragments of the meal which had fallen on the foot of the irascible sage, 
who thereupon foretold that Krishna should be killed as in the text. 

16. This is an allegorical personage, however, for Jara signifies 'infirmity,' 
'old age,' 'decay.' 

17. The Bhagavata explains how this part of the foot became exposed. 
Krishna had assumed one of the postures in which abstraction is 
practised: he had laid his left leg across his right thigh, by which the sole 
of the foot was turned outwards. 

18. He became Nirguria, 'devoid of all qualities.' 




38. Chapter 


Arjuna comes to Dwaraka, and bums the dead, and takes away the surviving 
inhabitants. Commencement of the Kali age. Shepherds and thieves attack 
Arjuna, and carry off the women and wealth. Arjuna regrets the loss of his 
prowess to Vyasa; who consoles him, and tells him the story of Ashtavakra's 
cursing the Apsarasas. Arjuna and his brothers place Parikshit on the throne, and 
go to the forests. End of the fifth book. 

ARJUNA having found the bodies of Krishna and of Rama, performed for them, 
and the rest of the slain, the obsequial rites. The eight queens of Krishna, who 
have been named, with Rukmini at their head, embraced the body of Hari, and 
entered the funeral fire. Revati also, embracing the corpse of Rama, entered the 
blazing pile, which was cool to her, happy in contact with her lord. Hearing these 
events, Ugrasena and Anakadundubhi, with Devaki and Rohini, committed 
themselves to the flames. The last ceremonies were performed for all these by 
Arjuna, who then made all the people leave the city, and took Vajra with him. 
The son of Kunti conducted the thousands of the wives of Krishna, with Vajra, 
and all the people, from Dwaraka, with tenderness and care, and travelled slowly 
away. The Sudharman palace and the Parijata tree, which had been brought to 
earth by Krishna, both proceeded to heaven; and on the same day that Hari 
departed from the earth the powerful dark-bodied Kali age descended. The ocean 
rose, and submerged the whole of Dwaraka, except alone the dwelling of the 
deity of the race of Yadu. The sea has not yet been able to wash that temple 
away, and there Kesava constantly abides, even in the present day. Whoever 
visits that holy shrine, the place where Krishna pursued his sports, is liberated 
from all his sins. The son of Pritha, Arjuna, halted the people he had brought 
from Dwaraka in the Panchanada country, in a rich and fertile spot; but the 
desires of the robbers (of the neighbourhood) were excited, when they observed 
so many widowed females, also such great riches, in the possession of Arjuna 
alone. Inflamed by their cupidity, they assembled the villainous Abhiras, and 
said to them, "Here is this Arjuna, immensely rich, and having numerous 
women, whose husbands have been slain, passing confidently amongst us; a 
disgrace to all brave men. His pride is raised by the death of Bhishma, Droria, 
Jayadratha, Kama, and others, whom he has slain: he does not know the prowess 


of simple villagers. Up, up; take your long thick staves: this stupid fellow 
despises us. Why should we not lift up our arms?" So saying, they rushed, armed 
with cudgels and clods of earth, upon the people, who were without their lord. 
Arjuna encountered them, and said to them in derision, "Retire, wretches, 
ignorant of what is right, unless ye are desirous of dying." But they disregarded 
his menaces, and seized his treasures and his women, the wives of Viswaksena. 
Thereupon Arjuna began to brace his heavenly bow Gandiva, irresistible in 
battle; but it was in vain; for, in spite of all his efforts to tighten it, it continued 
flaccid: neither could he call to recollection the incantations of the superhuman 
weapons. Losing all patience, he launched, as best he might, his shafts upon the 
enemy; but those shot from Gandiva merely scratched the skin. The arrows 
given him by Agni to carry certain destruction now were themselves destroyed, 
and were fatal to Arjuna in his contest with herdsmen. He endeavoured to recall 
the might of Krishna; animated by which, his numerous arrows had overthrown 
mighty kings; but he tried in vain, for now they were put aside by the peasants, 
or they flew at random, wide of their aim. His arrows being expended, he beat 
the banditti with the horn of his bow; but they only laughed at his blows: and the 
barbarians, in the sight of Arjuna, carried off all the women of the Vrishni and 
Andhaka tribes, and went their way. 

Then Jishnu was sorely distressed, and lamented bitterly, exclaiming, Alas! alas! 
I am deserted by my lord!" and he wept: and in that instant the bow and heavenly 
arms, his car and steeds, perished entirely, like a donation to an unlearned 
Brahman. "Resistless," said he, "are the decrees of fate, by whom feebleness has 
been inflicted upon me, deprived of my illustrious friend, and victory given to 
the base. These two arms are mine; mine, is this fist; this is my place; I am 
Arjuna: but without that righteous aid all these are pithless. The valour of 
Arjuna, the strength of Bhima, was all his work; and without him I am overcome 
by peasants: it cannot be from any other cause." So saying, Arjuna went to the 
city of Mathura, and there installed the Yadava prince, Vajra, as its king. There 
he beheld Vyasa, who was living in a wood, and he approached the sage, and 
saluted him respectfully. The Muni surveyed him for some time, as he lay 
prostrate at his feet, and said to him, "How is it that I see you thus shorn of your 
lustre? Have you been guilty of illicit intercourse with women, or of the death of 
a Brahman? or have you suffered some grievous disappointment? that you are so 
dejected. Have your prayers for progeny, or other good gifts, proved fruitless? or 
have you indulged improper passions? that your lustre is so dim. Or are you one 



that devours the meal he has given to the Brahmans? Say, Arjuna, have you 
seized upon the substance of the poor? Has the wind of a winnowing basket 
lighted upon you? or has an evil eye gazed upon you, Arjuna? that you look thus 
miserable. Have you been touched by the water of a finger-nail? or has the water 
of a water-jar sprinkled you? or, what is most probably the case, have you been 
beaten by your inferiors in battle?" 

Arjuna, having sighed deeply, related to Vyasa all the circumstances of his 
discomfiture, and continued; "Hari, who was our strength, our might, our 
heroism, our prowess, our prosperity, our brightness, has left us, and departed. 
Deprived of him, our friend, illustrious, and ever kindly speaking, we have 
become as feeble as if made of straw. Purushottama, who was the living vigour 
of my weapons, my arrows and my bow, is gone. As long as we looked upon 
him, fortune, fame, wealth, dignity never abandoned us: but Govinda is gone 
from amongst us. That Krishna has quitted earth, through whose power 
Bhishma, Drona, the king of Anga, Duryodhana, and the rest, were consumed. 
Not I alone, but Earth, has grown old, miserable, and lustreless, in the absence of 
the holder of the discus. Krishna, through devotion to whom Bhishma and other 
mighty men perished like moths in the flame of my valour, is gone; and I am 
now overcome by cowherds. The bow Gandiva, that was famed throughout the 
three worlds, has been foiled, since he has departed, by the sticks of peasants: 
the myriads of women over whom I was lord have been carried off from me by 
thieves, armed but with cudgels: the whole household of Krishna, O Krishna, has 
been forcibly carried away by peasants, who with their staves have put my 
strength to shame. That I am shorn of my lustre I do not marvel: it is wonderful 
that I live. Surely, grandsire, I alone am so shameless as to survive the stain of 
indignity inflicted by the vile." 

Vyasa replied to Arjuna, and said, "Think no more, my son, of your disgrace: it 
does not become you to grieve. Know that time subjects all beings to similar 
vicissitude. Time effects the production and dissolution of all creatures. All that 
exists is founded on time. Know this, Arjuna, and retain your fortitude. Rivers, 
seas, mountains, the whole earth, gods, men, animals, trees, insects, are all 
created, and all will be destroyed, by time. Knowing that all that is, is the effect 
of time, be tranquillized. These mighty works of Krishna, whatever they have 
been, have been performed to relieve earth of its burdens: for this he has come 
down. Earth, oppressed by her load, has had recourse to the assembly of the 



immortals; and Janarddana, who is one with time, has descended on that 
account. This object has been now accomplished: all the kings of the earth are 
slain; the race of Vrishrii and Andhaka is destroyed: no more remained for him to 
accomplish. Therefore has the lord departed whither he pleased, his ends being 
all fulfilled. At the period of creation the god of gods creates; in that of duration 
he preserves; and at the end of all he is mighty to annihilate. Now all is done. 
Therefore, Arjuna, be not afflicted by thy defeat: the prowess of mortals is the 
gift of time. Bhishma, Kama, and other kings, have been slain by thee alone; this 
was the work of time: and why, therefore, should not thy discomfiture, by those 
less than thou art, occur? In like manner as through thy devotion to Vishnu these 
were overthrown by thee, so at last has thy defeat by miserable thieves been 
wrought by time. That divinity, assuming various bodies, preserves the world; 
and in the end the lord of creatures destroys it. In the birth of thy fortunes 
Janarddana was thy friend; in their decline, thy enemies have been favoured by 
Kesava. Who would have believed that thou shouldst slay all the descendants of 
Kuru, and kindred of Ganga? Who would have believed that peasants should 
triumph over thee? Be assured, son of Pritha, that it is but the sport of the 
universal Hari that the Kauravas have been destroyed by thee, and that thou hast 
been defeated by herdsmen. With respect to the women whom thou lamentest, 
and who have been carried off by the thieves, hear from me an ancient story, 
which will explain why this has happened. 

r 

"In former times a Brahman, named Ashtavakra, was pursuing his religious 
penances, standing in water, and meditating on the eternal spirit, for many years. 
In consequence of the overthrow of the Asuras, there was a great festival on the 
summit of Meru: on their way to which, Rambha, Tilottama, and hundreds and 

r 

thousands of beautiful nymphs, saw the ascetic Ashtavakra, and they praised and 
hymned him for his devotions. They bowed down before him, and eulogized 
him, as he was immersed up to his throat in water, his hair twisted in a braid. So 
they sang in honour of him whatever they thought would be most agreeable to 

r 

that most eminent of Brahmans. Ashtavakra at last said to them, 'I am well 
pleased with you, illustrious damsels; whatever you wish for, ask of me, and I 
will give it you, however difficult it may be of attainment.' Then all those 
nymphs, Rambha, Tilottama, and others, recorded in the Vedas, replied, 'It is 
enough for us that thou art pleased; what need we aught else, venerable 
Brahman?' But some amongst them said, 'If, exalted sir, you are indeed pleased 
with us, then grant us a husband, the best of men, and sovereign of the 



r 

Brahmans.' 'So be it,' replied Ashtavakra, and thereupon came up from the 
waters. When the nymphs beheld him coming out of the water, and saw that he 
was very ugly, and crooked in eight places, they could not restrain their 
merriment, but laughed aloud. The Muni was very angry, and cursed them, and 
said, 'Since you have been so impertinent as to laugh at my deformity, I 
denounce upon you this imprecation: through the grace I have shewn unto you, 
you shall obtain the first of males for your husband; but in consequence of my 
curse, you shall afterwards fall into the hands of thieves.' When the nymphs 
heard this uttered by the Muni, they endeavoured to appease him; and they so far 
succeeded, that he announced to them they should finally return to the sphere of 

r 

the gods. It is in consequence, then, of the curse of the Muni Ashtavakra that 
these females, who were at first the wives of Kesava, have now fallen into the 
hands of the barbarians; and there is no occasion, Arjuna, for you to regret it in 
the least. All this destruction has been effected by the lord of all; and your end is 
also nigh at hand, since he has withdrawn from you strength, splendour, valour, 
and preeminence. Death is the doom of every one who is born: fall is the end of 
exaltation: union terminates in separation: and growth tends but to decay. 
Knowing all this, wise men are susceptible of neither grief nor joy; and those 
who learn their ways are even as they are (equally free from pleasure or pain). 
Do you therefore, most excellent prince, understand this truth, and, along with 
your brothers, relinquish every thing, and repair to the holy forest. Go now, and 
say from me to Yudhishthira, that he to-morrow, with his brethren, tread the path 
of heroes." 

Thus instructed by Vyasa, Arjuna went and related to the other sons of Pritha all 
that be had seen, had experienced, and had heard. When he had communicated to 
them the message of Vyasa, the sons of Pandu placed Parikshit on the throne, 
and went to the forest. 

I have thus narrated to you, Maitreya, in detail, the actions of Vasudeva, when he 
was born in the race of Yadu. 




Footnotes 


01. The Mahabharata takes the wives of Krishna first to Indraprastha, and 
there Rukmini and four others burn; but Satyabhama and others become 
ascetics, going to perform Tapasya in the forest. 

02. It is merely said in the Mahabharata that Vasudeva expired; on which 
four of his wives burnt themselves. 

03. The Kali age commenced from the death of Krishna, according to the 
usual notions; but it is commonly supposed to commence a little later, or 
with the reign of Parikshit. 

04. The Bhagavata agrees with the text in excepting the temple of Dwaraka, 
and asserting that it still remains, in direct contradiction of the 
Mahabharata, which declares that the sea did not spare any part whatever. 
It is clear, therefore, that when the latter was compiled the temple was 
not standing, and that it was erected between the date of the compilation 
and that of the two Puranas. The present shrine, which is held in great 
repute, stands at the extremity of the peninsula of Guzerat. It is still an 
object of pilgrimage; it was so in the reign of Akbar (Ayin Akbari); and 
has been so, no doubt, from a remote period. The image formerly 
worshipped there was carried off 600 years ago, and this was most 
probably subsequent to the date of both the Puranas; for the idol was a 
form of Krishna, called Raria chor, a popular divinity, unknown in the 
Paurariik pantheon. Another image was substituted in place of that which 
was taken away. Notwithstanding the testimony of our text, and that of 
the Bhagavata, the originality of the temple is disputed, and a place thirty 
miles south from Purbandar is said to be the spot where Dwaraka was 
swallowed up by the ocean. Hamilton, from Macmurdo, &c. I. 662. 

05. 'The country of the five rivers,' the Panjab: rather an out of the way route 
from Dwaraka to Delhi. 

06. Abhiras mean 'herds,' and they are afterwards called by Arjuna, Gopalas, 
'herdsmen' The pastoral tribes of the west of India, and particularly those 
of Afghanistan, almost always combine the character of freebooter with 
that of shepherd. 

07. The principal wives of Krishna, however, according to the Mahabharata, 
escaped. The occurrence is described there much in the same way, but 
more briefly. It is not detailed in the Bhagavata. 

08. A name of Vyasa. 

09. The story of Ashtavakra is related in the Mahabharata. He was the son of 
Kahora, who neglecting his wife, was rebuked for it by his yet unborn 


son. The father angrily cursed him, that he should be born bent in every 
part; and he was accordingly brought forth crooked (vakra) in eight limbs 

r 

(ashta). He became nevertheless a celebrated sage. See also Hindu 
Theatre, I. 293, note. 




The Vishnu Purana-Book 6 


01. Chapter 
02. Chapter 
03. Chapter 
04. Chapter 
05. Chapter 
06. Chapter 
07. Chapter 
08. Chapter 




01. Chapter 


Of the dissolution of the world: the four ages: the decline of all things, and 
deterioration of mankind, in the Kali age. 

MAITREYA.—You have narrated to me, illustrious sage, the creation of the 
world, the genealogies of the patriarchs, the duration of the Manwantaras, and 
the dynasties of princes, in detail. I am now desirous to hear from you an 
account of the dissolution of the world, the season of total destruction, and that 
which occurs at the expiration of a Kalpa. 

PARASARA.—Hear from me, Maitreya, exactly the circumstances of the end of 
all things, and the dissolution that occurs either at the expiration of a Kalpa, or 
that which takes place at the close of the life of Brahma. A month of mortals is a 
day and night of the progenitors: a year of mortals is a day and night of the gods. 
Twice a thousand aggregates of the four ages is a day and night of Brahma. The 
four ages are the Krita, Treta, Dwapara, and Kali; comprehending together 
twelve thousand years of the gods. There are infinite successions of these four 
ages, of a similar description, the first of which is always called the Krita, and 
the last the Kali. In the first, the Krita, is that age which is created by Brahma; in 
the last, which is the Kali age, a dissolution of the world occurs. 

MAITREYA.—Venerable sir, you are able to give me a description of the nature 
of the Kali age, in which four-footed virtue suffers total extinction. 

PARASARA.—Hear, Maitreya, an account of the nature of the Kali age, 
respecting which you have inquired, and which is now close at hand. 

The observance of caste, order, and institutes will not prevail in the Kali age, nor 
will that of the ceremonial enjoined by the Sanaa, Rik, and Yajur Vedas. 
Marriages in this age will not be conformable to the ritual, nor will the rules that 
connect the spiritual preceptor and his disciple be in force. The laws that regulate 
the conduct of husband and wife will be disregarded, and oblations to the gods 
with fire no longer be offered. In whatever family he may be born, a powerful 
and rich man will be held entitled to espouse maidens of every tribe. A 


regenerate man will be initiated in any way whatever, and such acts of penance 
as may be performed will be unattended by any results. Every text will be 
scripture that people choose to think so all gods will be gods to them that 
worship them; and all orders of life will be common alike to all persons. In the 
Kali age, fasting, austerity, liberality, practised according to the pleasure of those 
by whom they are observed, will constitute righteousness. Pride of wealth will 
be inspired by very insignificant possessions. Pride of beauty will be prompted 
by (no other personal charm than fine) hair. Gold, jewels, diamonds, clothes, will 
all have perished, and then hair will be the only ornament with which women 
can decorate themselves. Wives will desert their husbands, when they lose their 
property; and they only who are wealthy will be considered by women as their 
lords. He who gives away much money will be the master of men; and family 
descent will no longer be a title of supremacy. Accumulated treasures will be 
expended on (ostentatious) dwellings. The minds of men will be wholly 
occupied in acquiring wealth; and wealth will be spent solely on selfish 
gratifications. Women will follow their inclinations, and be ever fond of 
pleasure. Men will fix their desires upon riches, even though dishonestly 
acquired. No man will part with the smallest fraction of the smallest coin, though 
entreated by a friend. Men of all degrees will conceit themselves to be equal 
with Brahmans. Cows will be held in esteem only as they supply milk. The 
people will be almost always in dread of dearth, and apprehensive of scarcity; 
and will hence ever be watching the appearances of the sky: they will all live, 
like anchorets, upon leaves and roots and fruit, and put a period to their lives 
through fear of famine and want. In truth there will never be abundance in the 
Kali age, and men will never enjoy pleasure and happiness. They will take their 
food without previous ablution, and without worshipping fire, gods, or guests, or 
offering obsequial libations to their progenitors. The women will be fickle, short 
of stature, gluttonous: they will have many children, and little means: scratching 
their heads with both hands, they will pay no attention to the commands of their 
husbands or parents: they will be selfish, abject, and slatternly: they will be 
scolds and liars: they will be indecent and immoral in their conduct, and will 
ever attach themselves to dissolute men. Youths, although disregarding the rules 
of studentship, will study the Vedas. Householders will neither sacrifice nor 
practise becoming liberality. Anchorets will subsist upon food accepted from 
mstics; and mendicants will be influenced by regard for friends and associates. 
Princes, instead of protecting, will plunder their subjects; and, under the pretext 
of levying customs, will rob merchants of their property. In the Kali age every 



one who has cars and elephants and steeds will be a Raja every one who is feeble 
will be a slave. Vaisyas will abandon agriculture and commerce, and gain a 
livelihood by servitude or the exercise of mechanical arts. Sudras, seeking a 
subsistence by begging, and assuming the outward marks of religious 
mendicants, will become the impure followers of impious and heretical 
doctrines. 

Oppressed by famine and taxation, men will desert their native lands, and go to 
those countries which are fit for coarser grains. The path of the Vedas being 
obliterated, and men having deviated into heresy, iniquity will flourish, and the 
duration of life will therefore decrease. In consequence of horrible penances not 
enjoined by scripture, and of the vices of the rulers, children will die in their 
infancy. Women will bear children at the age of five, six, or seven years; and 
men beget them when they are eight, nine, or ten. A man will be grey when he is 
twelve; and no one will exceed twenty years of life. Men will possess little 
sense, vigour, or virtue, and will therefore perish in a very brief period. In 
proportion as heresy extends, so, Maitreya, shall the progress of the Kali age be 
estimated by the wise. In proportion as the number of the pious, who adhere to 
the lessons of the Vedas, diminishes—as the efforts of individuals who cultivate 
virtue relax—as the first of males becomes no longer the object of sacrifices—as 
respect for the teachers of the Vedas declines—and as regard is acknowledged for 
the disseminators of heresy—so may wise men note the augmented influence of 
the Kali age. 

In the Kali age, Maitreya, men, corrupted by unbelievers, will refrain from 
adoring Vishnu, the lord of sacrifice, the creator and lord of all; and will say, "Of 
what authority are the Vedas? what are gods or Brahmans? what need is there of 
purification with water?" Then will the clouds yield scanty rain: then will the 
corn be light in ear, and the grain will be poor, and of little sap: garments will be 
mostly made of the fibres of the San the principal of trees will be the Sami the 
prevailing caste will be the Sudra: millet will be the more common grain: the 
milk in use will be chiefly that of goats: unguents will be made of Usira grass. 
The mother and father-in-law will be venerated in place of parents; and a man's 
friends will be his brother-in-law, or one who has a wanton wife. Men will say, 
"Who has a father? who has a mother? each one is born according to his deeds:" 
and therefore they will look upon a wife's or husband's parents as their own. 
Endowed with little sense, men, subject to all the infirmities of mind, speech, 



and body, will daily commit sins; and every thing that is calculated to afflict 
beings, vicious, impure, and wretched, will be generated in the Kali age. Then 
shall some places follow a separate duty, devoid of holy study, oblations to fire, 
and invocations of the gods. Then, in the Kali age, shall a man acquire by a 
trifling exertion as much eminence in virtue as is the result of arduous penance 
in the Krita age, or age of purity. 


Footnotes 

01. Two kinds of great or universal dissolution are here intimated; one 
occurring at the end of a Kalpa, or day of Brahma, to which the term 
Upasanhriti is applied in the text, and Atyantika laya by the 
commentator; and the other taking place at the end of the life of Brahma, 
which is termed a great or elemental dissolution: Maha pralaya and 
Prakrita pralaya. 

02. These measures of time are more fully detailed in the first book: see p. 

22 . 

03. This is an allusion to a popular notion, originating probably with Manu: 
"In the Krita age the genius of truth and right stands firm on his four feet; 
but in the following ages he is deprived successively of one foot," &c. I. 
81, 82. 

04. 'Such an act is just what it is;' that is, it may be attended by 
inconvenience to the individual, but is utterly inefficacious for the 
expiation of sin. 

05. Whether it is conformable or contradictory to the Vedas and the law. The 
passage may be rendered also, 'The doctrine or dogma of any one soever 
will be scripture.' 

06. He will not part with the half of the half of half a Paha; that is, with ten 
Cowries; a Paha being equal to eighty Cowries, or small shells. Five 
Panas are equal to one Ana, or the sixteenth of a Rupee; and, at two 
shillings the Rupee, ten Cowries are equal to about one-seventh of a 
farthing. 

07. They will be valued for their individual use only, not from any notion of 
their generic sanctity. 


08. The Bhagavata has, "Religious students will be regardless of vows and 
purification; householders will beg, not give alms; anchorets will dwell 
in villages; and mendicants will be desirous of riches." 

09. That is, princes and warriors will be so no longer by virtue of their birth 
and caste. 

10. Most of the mendicant orders admit members without distinction of 
caste; but probably Buddhists especially are here intended. The 
Bhagavata repeatedly alludes to the diffusion of heretical doctrines and 
practices, the substitution of outward signs and marks for devotion, and 
the abandonment of the worship of Vishnu. The Saiva mendicant orders 
are probably those especially in view. The same probably are intended by 
our text in the subsequent allusion to unauthorized austerities, and 
sectarial marks. 

11. 'Gavedhuka (Coix barbata) and other bad sorts of grain;' Another reading 
is, 'Countries growing wheat, barley, and the like.' But to place wheat and 
barley amongst inferior grains, and to rank them lower than rice, is a 
classification that could have occurred to a native of Bengal alone. 

12. The Vayu says three and twenty; the Bhagavata, from twenty to thirty. 

13. The complaints of the prevalence of heterodox doctrines, and neglect of 
the practices of the Vedas, which recur in the Bhagavata and our text, 
indicate a period of change in the condition of the Hindu religion, which 
it would be important to verify. If reference is made to Buddhism, to 
which in some respects the allusions especially apply, it would probably 
denote a period not long subsequent to the Christian era; but it is more 
likely to be of a later date, or in the eighth and ninth centuries, when 
Sankara is said to have reformed a variety of corrupt practices, and given 
rise to others. See As. Res. vol. XVI. p. la. 

14. Crotolaria juncea. 

15. The silk cotton, Bombax heptaphylla. 

16. The expression Kwachil-loka, 'a certain place,' is explained by the 
commentator, Kikata, &c.; confirming the inference that Buddhism is 
especially aimed at in the previous passages; for Kikata, or south Behar, 
is the scene of Sakya's earliest and most successful labours. 

17. Several of the Purarias contain allusions to the degeneracy of the Kali 
age, but none afford more copious details. The description in the 
Bhagavata is much shorter; that of the Vayu is much the same, and 
employs many of the same verses and illustrations. 


18. This might be suspected of being said ironically, referring to what had 
been just observed of places where a religion prevailed that required 
neither study nor sacrifice. The commentator, however, understands it 
literally, and asserts that allusion is here made to the Vaishriava faith, in 
which devotion to Vishnu or Krishna, and the mere repetition of his 
name, are equally efficacious in the Kali age with the penances and 
sacrifices of the preceding ages: therefore he concludes the Kali, by this 
one property, is the best of all the ages. This interpretation is confirmed 
by the following chapter. 




02. Chapter 


Redeeming properties of the Kali age. Devotion to Vishnu sufficient to salvation 

in that age for all castes and persons. 

UPON this subject, Maitreya, you shall hear what the wise Vyasa has related, as 
it is communicated truly by me. 

It was once a matter of dispute amongst the sages, at what season the least moral 
merit obtained the greatest reward, and by whom it was most easily displayed. In 
order to terminate the discussion, they went to Veda Vyasa to remove their 
doubts. They found the illustrious Muni, my son, half immersed in the water of 
the Ganges; and awaiting the close of his ablutions, the sages remained on the 
banks of the sacred stream, under shelter of a grove of trees. As my son plunged 
down into the water, and again rose up from it, the Munis heard him exclaim, 
"Excellent, excellent, is the Kali age!" Again he dived, and again rising, said in 
their hearing, "Well done, well done Sudra; thou art happy!" Again he sank 
down, and as he once more emerged they heard him say, "Well done, well done, 
women; they are happy! who are more fortunate than they?" After this, my son 
finished his bathing, and the sages met him as he approached to welcome them. 
After he had given them seats, and they had proffered their respects, the son of 
Satyavati said to them, "On what account have you come to me?" They replied, 
"We came to you to consult you on a subject on which we entertain some doubt; 
but that may be at present suspended: explain to us something else. We heard 
you say, 'Excellent is the Kali age! Well done, Sudra! Well done, women!' Now 
we are desirous to know why this was said, why you called them repeatedly, 
happy. Tell us the meaning of it, if it be not a mystery. We will then propose to 
you the question that occupies our thoughts." 

Being thus addressed by the Munis, Vyasa smiled, and said to them, "Hear, 
excellent sages, why I uttered the words 'Well done, well done.' The fruit of 
penance, of continence, of silent prayer, and the like, practised in the Krita age 
for ten years, in the Treta for one year, in the Dwapara for a month, is obtained 
in the Kali age in a day and night: therefore did I exclaim, 'Excellent, excellent, 
is the Kali age!' That reward which a man obtains in the Krita by abstract 


meditation, in the Treta by sacrifice, in the Dwapara by adoration, he receives in 
the Kali by merely reciting the name of Kesava. In the Kali age a man displays 
the most exalted virtue by very little exertion; therefore, pious sages, who know 
what virtue is, I was pleased with the Kali age. Formerly the Vedas were to be 
acquired by the twice-born through the diligent observance of self-denial; and it 
was their duty to celebrate sacrifices conformably to the ritual. Then idle 
prayers, idle feasts, and fruitless ceremonies, were practised but to mislead the 
twice-born; for although observed by them devoutly, yet, in consequence of 
some irregularity in their celebration, sin was incurred in all their works, and 
what they ate, or what they drank, did not effect the fulfilment of their desires. In 
all their objects the twice-born enjoyed no independence, and they attained their 
respective spheres only with exceeding pain. The Sudra, on the contrary, more 
fortunate than they, reaches his assigned station by rendering them service, and 
performing merely the sacrifice of preparing food, in which no rules determine 
what may or may not be eaten, what may or may not be drunk. Therefore, most 
excellent sages, is the Sudra fortunate. 

"Riches are accumulated by men in modes not incompatible with their peculiar 
duties, and they are then to be bestowed upon the worthy, and expended in 
constant sacrifice. There is great trouble in their acquisition; great care in their 
preservation; great distress from the want of them; and great grief for their loss. 
Thus, eminent Brahmans, through these and other sources of anxiety, men attain 
their allotted spheres of Prajapati and the rest only by exceeding labour and 
suffering. This is not the case with women: a woman has only to honour her 
husband, in act, thought, and speech, to reach the same region to which he is 
elevated; and she thus accomplishes her object without any great exertion. This 
was the purport of my exclamation, 'Well done!' the third time. I have thus 
related to you what you asked. Now demand the question you came to put to me, 
in any way you please, and I will make you a distinct reply." 

The Munis then said to Vyasa, "The question we intended to have asked you has 
been already answered by you in your reply to our subsequent inquiry." On 
hearing which, Krishna Dwaipayana laughed, and said to the holy persons who 
had come to see him, whose eyes were wide open with astonishment, "I 
perceived, with the eye of divine knowledge, the question you intended to ask, 
and in allusion to it I uttered the expressions, 'Well done, well done.' In truth, in 
the Kali age duty is discharged with very little trouble by mortals, whose faults 



are all washed away by the water of their individual merits; by Sudras, through 
diligent attendance only upon the twice-born; and by women, through the slight 
effort of obedience to their husbands. Therefore, Brahmans, did I thrice express 
my admiration of their happiness; for in the Krita and other ages great were the 
toils of the regenerate to perform their duty. I waited not for your inquiry, but 
replied at once to the question you purposed to ask. Now, ye who know what 
virtue is, what else do you wish me to tell you?" 

The Munis then saluted and praised Vyasa, and, being freed by him from 
uncertainty, departed as they came. To you also, excellent Maitreya, have I 
imparted this secret, this one great virtue of the otherwise vicious Kali age. The 
dissolution of the world, and the aggregation of the elements, I will now describe 
to you. 




Footnotes 

01. The illustration of the efficacy of devotion to Vishnu given in this chapter 
is peculiar to this Puraria, but the doctrine is common to it and the 
Bhagavata. It is repeatedly inculcated in that work. The parallel passage 
in the twelfth book is the following. "Purushottama, abiding in the hearts 
of men, takes away all the sins of the Kali age, produced by place or 
property. Bhagavan, abiding in the heart, and heard, repeated, read of, 
worshipped, or honoured, dissipates the ills of men for ten thousand 
births. As fire, entering into the substance of gold, purifies it from the 
alloy with which it is debased in the mine, so Vishnu, united with the 
devotee, is the refiner from all that is evil. By learning, penance, 
suppression of breath, friendship, pilgrimage, ablution, mortification, 
gifts, prayer, the soul attains not that exceeding purity which it derives 
from the presence of Vishnu. Therefore, with all your soul, O king, hold 
Kesava ever present in your heart. Let one about to die be most careful in 
this; for so he goes to supreme felicity. Let the name of the supreme god, 
Vishnu, be repeated diligently by all in their last moments; for he who 
desires liberation shall attain it by the frequent repetition of the name of 
Krishna. Final felicity is derived in the Krita age from holy study; in the 


Treta, from religious rites. In the Dwapara it is attained by pious services; 
but in the Kali age it is secured by repeating the name of Hari." Similar 

r 

doctrines are taught in the Gita, and other Vaishnava works. See As. Res. 
vol. XVI. 




03. Chapter 


Three different kinds of dissolution. Duration of a Pararddha. The Clepsydra, or 
vessel for measuring time. The dissolution that occurs at the end of a day of 
Brahma. 

THE dissolution of existing beings is of three kinds, incidental, elemental, and 
absolute. The incidental is that which relates to Brahma, and occurs at the end of 
a Kalpa: the elemental is that which takes place after two Pararddhas: the 
absolute is final liberation from existence. 

MAITREYA.—Tell me, excellent master, what is the enumeration of a Pararddha, 
the expiration of two of which is the period of elemental dissolution. 

PARASARA.—A Pararddha, Maitreya, is that number which occurs in the 
eighteenth place of figures, enumerated according to the rule of decimal 
notation. At the end of twice that period elemental dissolution occurs, when all 
the discrete products of nature are withdrawn into their indiscrete source. The 
shortest period of time is a Matra, which is equal to the twinkling of the human 
eye. Fifteen Matras make a Kashtha; thirty Kashthas, one Kala; fifteen Kalas, 
one Nadika. A Nadika is ascertained by a measure of water, with a vessel made 
of twelve Palas and a half of copper, in the bottom of which there is to be a hole 
made with a tube of gold, of the weight of four Mashas, and four inches long. 
According to the Magadha measure, the vessel should hold a Prastha (or sixteen 
Palas) of water. Two of these Nadis make one Muhurtta; thirty of which are one 
day and night. Thirty such periods form a month; twelve months make a year, or 
a day and night of the gods; and three hundred and sixty such days constitute a 
year of the celestials. An aggregate of four ages contains twelve thousand divine 
years; and a thousand periods of four ages complete a day of Brahma. That 
period is also termed a Kalpa, during which fourteen Manus preside; and at the 
end of it occurs the incidental or Brahma dissolution. The nature of this 
dissolution is very fearful: hear me describe it, as well as that which takes place 
at the elemental dissolution, which I will also relate to you. 

At the end of a thousand periods of four ages the earth is for the most part 


exhausted. A total dearth then ensues, which lasts a hundred years; and, in 
consequence of the failure of food, all beings become languid and exanimate, 
and at last entirely perish. The eternal Vishnu then assumes the character of 
Rudra, the destroyer, and descends to reunite all his creatures with himself. He 
enters into the seven rays of the sun, drinks up all the waters of the globe, and 
causes all moisture whatever, in living bodies or in the soil, to evaporate; thus 
drying up the whole earth. The seas, the rivers, the mountain torrents, and 
springs, are all exhaled; and so are all the waters of Patala, the regions below the 
earth. Thus fed, through his intervention, with abundant moisture, the seven 
solar rays dilate to seven suns, whose radiance glows above, below, and on every 
side, and sets the three worlds and Patala on fire. The three worlds, consumed by 
these suns, become rugged and deformed throughout the whole extent of their 
mountains, rivers, and seas; and the earth, bare of verdure, and destitute of 
moisture, alone remains, resembling in appearance the back of a tortoise. The 
destroyer of all things, Hari, in the form of Rudra, who is the flame of time, 
becomes the scorching breath of the serpent Sesha, and thereby reduces Patala to 
ashes. The great fire, when it has burnt all the divisions of Patala, proceeds to the 
earth, and consumes it also. A vast whirlpool of eddying flame then spreads to 
the region of the atmosphere, and the sphere of the gods, and wraps them in ruin. 
The three spheres shew like a frying-pan amidst the surrounding flames, that 
prey upon all moveable or stationary things. The inhabitants of the two upper 
spheres, having discharged their functions, and being annoyed by the heat, 
remove to the sphere above, or Maharloka. When that becomes heated, its 
tenants, who after the full period of their stay are desirous of ascending to higher 
regions, depart for the Janaloka. 

Janarddana, in the person of Rudra, having consumed the whole world, breathes 
forth heavy clouds; and those called Samvartta, resembling vast elephants in 
bulk, overspread the sky, roaring, and darting lightnings. Some are as black as 
the blue lotus; some are white as the water-lily; some are dusky, like smoke; and 
some are yellow; some are of a dun colour, like that of an ass; some like ashes 
sprinkled on the forehead; some are deep blue, as the lapis lazuli; some azure, 
like the sapphire; some are white, as the conch or the jasmine; and some are 
black, as collyrium; some are of bright red, like the ladybird; some are of the 
fierceness of red arsenic; and some are like the wing of the painted jay. Such are 
these massy clouds in hue: in form some resemble towns, some mountains, some 
are like houses and hovels, and some are like columns. Mighty in size, and loud 



in thunder, they fill all space. Showering down torrents of water, these clouds 
quench the dreadful fires which involve the three worlds, and then they rain 
uninterruptedly for a hundred years, and deluge the whole world. Pouring down 
in drops as large as dice, these rains overspread the earth, and fill the middle 
region, and inundate heaven. The world is now enveloped in darkness, and all 
things, animate or inanimate, having perished, the clouds continue to pour down 
their waters for more than a hundred years. 


Footnotes 

01. The first is called Naimittaka, 'occasional' or 'incidental,' or Brahmya, as 
occasioned by the intervals of Brahma's days; the destruction of 
creatures, though not of the substance of the world, occurring during his 
night. The general resolution of the elements into their primitive source, 
or Prakriti, is the Prakritika destruction, and occurs at the end of 
Brahma's life. The third, the absolute or final, Atyantika, is individual 
annihilation; Moksha, exemption for ever from future existence. The 
Bhagavata here notices the fourth kind, of which mention occurred in a 
preceding passage, Nitya or constant dissolution; explaining it to be the 
imperceptible change that all things suffer in the various stages of growth 
and decay, life and death. 'The various conditions of beings subject to 
change are occasioned by that constant dissolution of life which is 
rapidly produced by the resistless stream of time, taking every thing 
perpetually away.' The Vayu describes but three kinds of Pralaya, 
omitting the Nitya. 

02. Maitreya has a rather indifferent memory but the periods specified in the 
two places do not agree. In the first book two Pararddhas, as equal to one 
hundred years of Brahma, are 311.040.000.000.000 years of mortals. 

03. Counting according to this mode of enumeration, a Pararddha is 
represented by 100.000.000.000.000.000. The Vayu Purana has a term 
for each of these decimal values. Dasa, 10; Satam, 100; Sahasram, 1000; 
Ayutam, 10.000; Niyutam, 100.000; Prayutam, 1.000.000; Arvudam, 
10.000.000; Nyurvudam, 100.000.000; Vrindam, 1.000.000.000; Param, 
10.000.000.000; Kharvam, 100.000.000.000; Nikharvam, 


1000.000.000.000; Sankham, 10.000.000.000.000; Padmam, 
100.000.000.000.000; Samudram, 1.000.000.000.000; Madhyamam, 
10.000.000.000.000.000; Pararddham, 100.000.000.000.000.000. In the 
first book the Pararddham, as the half of Brahma's life, is but 
155.520.000.000.000, fifteen instead of eighteen places of figures. 

04. The description of the Clepsydra is very brief, and wanting in precision. 
One of the commentaries is more explicit: 'A vessel made of twelve Palas 
and a half of copper, and holding a Prastha, Magadha measure, of water, 
broad at top, and having at bottom a tube of gold of four Mashas weight, 
four fingers long, is placed in water, and the time in which the vessel is 

r r 

filled by the hole in the bottom is called a Nadika:' The term Salaka 
generally means a needle or stake, but it must here denote a pipe. The 
common measure of the Nadi is a thin shallow brass cup, with a small 
hole in the bottom. It is placed on the surface of water, in a large vessel, 
where nothing can disturb it, and where the water gradually fills the cup, 
and sinks it. As. Res, vol. V. 

05. These also have their several appellations: the commentator quotes the 

r r 

Vedas as the authority: Araga, Bhraja, Patala, Patanga, Swamabhak, 
Jyotishmat, and Savibhasa. 

06. The passage may also be understood, 'Those go to Janaloka who are 
desirous of obtaining Brahma, or final liberation, through the ten stages 
of perfection—devotion, penance, truth, &c.' In the Vayu Puraria more 
details are specified. Those sainted mortals who have diligently 
worshipped Vishnu, and are distinguished for piety, abide, at the time of 
dissolution, in Maharloka, with the Pitris, the Manus, the seven Rishis, 
the various orders of celestial spirits, and the gods. These, when the heat 
of the flames that destroy the world reaches to Maharloka, repair to 
Janaloka in their subtile forms, destined to become reembodied, in 
similar capacities as their former, when the world is renewed, at the 
beginning of the succeeding Kalpa. This continues throughout the life of 
Brahma; at the expiration of his life all are destroyed: but those who have 
then attained a residence in the Brahmaloka, by having identified 
themselves in spirit with the supreme, are finally resolved into the sole- 
existing Brahma. 




04. Chapter 


Continuation of the account of the first kind of dissolution. Of the second kind, 
or elemental dissolution; of all being resolved into primary spirit. 

WHEN the waters have reached the region of the seven Rishis, and the whole of 
the three worlds is one ocean, they stop. The breath of Vishnu becomes a strong 
wind, which blows for more than a hundred years, until all the clouds are 
dispersed. The wind is then reabsorbed, and he of whom all things are made, the 
lord by whom all things exist, he who is inconceivable, without beginning of the 
universe, reposes, sleeping upon Sesha, in the midst of the deep. The creator, 
Hari, sleeps upon the ocean, in the form of Brahma—glorified by Sanaka And the 
saints who had gone to the Janaloka, and contemplated by the holy inhabitants of 
Brahmaloka, anxious for final liberation—involved in mystic slumber, the 
celestial personification of his own illusions, and meditating on his own 
ineffable spirit, which is called Vasudeva. This, Maitreya, is the dissolution 
termed incidental, because Hari, in the form of Brahma, sleeps there, as its 
incidental cause. 

When the universal spirit wakes, the world revives; when he closes his eyes, all 
things fall upon the bed of mystic slumber. In like manner as a thousand great 
ages constitute a day of Brahma, so his night consists of the same period; during 
which the world is submerged by a vast ocean. Awaking at the end of his night, 
the unborn, Vishnu, in the character of Brahma, creates the universe anew, in the 
manner formerly related to you. 

I have thus described to you the intermediate dissolution of the world, occurring 
at the end of every Kalpa. I will now, Maitreya, describe to you elemental 
dissolution. When by dearth and fire all the worlds and Patalas are withered up, 
and the modifications of Mahat and other products of nature are by the will of 
Krishna destroyed, the progress of elemental dissolution is begun. Then, first, 
the waters swallow up the property of earth, which is the rudiment of smell; and 
earth, deprived of its property, proceeds to destruction. Devoid of the rudiment 
of odour, the earth becomes one with water. The waters then being much 
augmented, roaring, and rushing along, fill up all space, whether agitated or still. 


When the universe is thus pervaded by the waves of the watery element, its 
rudimental flavour is licked up by the element of fire, and, in consequence of the 
destruction of their rudiments, the waters themselves are destroyed. Deprived of 
the essential rudiment of flavour, they become one with fire, and the universe is 
therefore entirely filled with flame, which drinks up the water on every side, and 
gradually overspreads the whole of the world. While space is enveloped in 
flame, above, below, and all around, the element of wind seizes upon the 
mdimental property, or form, which is the cause of light; and that being 
withdrawn, all becomes of the nature of air. The rudiment of form being 
destroyed, and fire deprived of its rudiment, air extinguishes fire, and spreads 
resistlessly over space, which is deprived of light when fire merges into air. Air 
then, accompanied by sound, which is the source of ether, extends every where 
throughout the ten regions of space, until ether seizes upon contact, its 
mdimental property; by the loss of which, air is destroyed, and ether remains 
unmodified: devoid of form, flavour, touch, and smell, it exists unembodied and 
vast, and pervades the whole of space. Ether, whose characteristic property and 
mdiment is sound, exists alone, occupying all the vacuity of space. But then the 
radical element egotism devours sound, and all the elements and faculties are at 
once merged into their original. This primary element is consciousness, 
combined with the property of darkness, and is itself swallowed up by Mahat, 
whose characteristic property is intelligence; and earth and Mahat are the inner 
and outer boundaries of the universe. In this manner, as in the creation were the 
seven forms of nature (Prakriti), reckoned from Mahat to earth, so, at the time of 
elemental dissolution, these seven successively reenter into each other. The egg 
of Brahma is dissolved in the waters that surround it, with its seven zones, seven 
oceans, seven regions, and their mountains. The investure of water is drunk up 
by fire: the stratum of fire is absorbed by that of air: air blends itself with ether: 
the primary element of egotism devours the ether, and is itself taken up by 
intellect, which, along with all these, is seized upon by nature (Prakriti). 
Equilibrium of the three properties, without excess or deficiency, is called nature 
(Prakriti), origin (Hetu), the chief principle (Pradhana), cause (Karana), supreme 
(Param). This Prakriti is essentially the same, whether discrete or indiscrete; 
only that which is discrete is finally lost or absorbed in the indiscrete. Spirit also, 
which is one, pure, imperishable, eternal, all-pervading, is a portion of that 
supreme spirit which is all things. That spirit which is other than (embodied) 
spirit, in which there are no attributes of name, species, or the like—which is one 
with all wisdom, and is to be understood as sole existence—that is Brahma, 



infinite glory, supreme spirit, supreme power, Vishnu, all that is; from whence 
the perfect sage returns no more. Nature (Prakriti), which I have described to 
you as being essentially both discrete and indiscrete, and spirit (which is united 
with body), both resolve into supreme spirit. Supreme spirit is the upholder of all 
things, and the ruler of all things, and is glorified in the Vedas and in the Vedanta 
by the name of Vishnu. 

Works, as enjoined by the Vedas, are of two kinds, active (Pravritta) and 
quiescent (Nivritta); by both of which the universal person is worshipped by 
mankind. He, the lord of sacrifice, the male of sacrifice, the most excellent male, 
is worshipped by men in the active mode by rites enjoined in the Rik, Yajur, and 
Sanaa Vedas. The soul of wisdom, the person of wisdom, Vishnu, the giver of 
emancipation, is worshipped by sages in the quiescent form, through meditative 
devotion. The exhaustless Vishnu is whatever thing that is designated by long, 
short, or prolated syllables, or that which is without a name. He is that which is 
discrete, and that which is indiscrete: he is exhaustless spirit, supreme spirit, 
universal spirit, Hari, the wearer of universal forms. Nature, whether discrete or 
indiscrete, is absorbed into him, and (detached) spirit also merges into the all- 
diffusive and unobstructed spirit. The period of two Pararddhas, as I have 
described it to you, Maitreya, is called a day of that potent Vishnu; and whilst 
the products of nature are merged into their source, nature into spirit, and that 
into the supreme, that period is termed his night, and is of equal duration with 
his day. But, in fact, to that eternal supreme spirit there is neither day nor night, 
and these distinctions are only figuratively applied to the almighty. I have thus 
explained to you the nature of elemental dissolution, and will now expound to 
you which is final. 




Footnotes 

01. The Naimittika Pralaya is described in the Vayu, Bhagavata, Kurma, and 
other Purarias, to the same effect, and very commonly in precisely the 
same words. 

02. The Bhagavata notices the Prakrita pralaya much more briefly, and it is 
omitted in the Vayu. 




05. Chapter 


The third kind of dissolution, or final liberation from existence. Evils of worldly 
life. Sufferings in infancy, manhood, old age. Pains of hell. Imperfect felicity of 
heaven. Exemption from birth desirable by the wise. The nature of spirit or god. 
Meaning of the terms Bhagavat and Vasudeva. 

THE wise man having investigated the three kinds of worldly pain, or mental 
and bodily affliction and the like, and having acquired true wisdom, and 
detachment from human objects, obtains final dissolution. The first of the three 
pains, or Adhyatmika, is of two kinds, bodily and mental. Bodily pain is of many 
kinds, as you shall hear. Affections of the head, catarrh, fever, cholic, fistula, 
spleen, hemorrhoids, intumescence, sickness, ophthalmia, dysentery, leprosy, 
and many other diseases, constitute bodily affliction. Mental sufferings are love, 
anger, fear, hate, covetousness, stupefaction, despair, sorrow, malice, disdain, 
jealousy, envy, and many other passions which are engendered in the mind. 
These and various other afflictions, mental or corporeal, are comprised, under 
the class of worldly sufferings, which is called Adhyatmika (natural and 
inseparable). That pain to which, excellent Brahman, the term Adhibhautika 
(natural, but incidental) is applied, is every kind of evil which is inflicted (from 
without) upon men by beasts, birds, men, goblins, snakes, fiends, or reptiles; and 
the pain that is termed Adhidaivika (or superhuman) is the work of cold, heat, 
wind, rain, lightning, and other (atmospherical phenomena). Affliction, 
Maitreya, is multiplied in thousands of shapes in the progress of conception, 
birth, decay, disease, death, and hell. The tender (and subtile) animal exists in the 
embryo, surrounded by abundant filth, floating in water, and distorted in its back, 
neck, and bones; enduring severe pain even in the course of its developement, as 
disordered by the acid, acrid, bitter, pungent, and saline articles of its mother's 
food; incapable of extending or contracting its limbs; reposing amidst the slime 
of ordure and urine; every way incommoded; unable to breathe; endowed with 
consciousness, and calling to memory many hundred previous births. Thus exists 
the embryo in profound affliction, bound to the world by its former works. 

When the child is about to be born, its face is besmeared by excrement, urine, 
blood, mucus, and semen; its attachment to the uterus is ruptured by the 


Prajapati wind; it is turned head downwards, and violently expelled from the 
womb by the powerful and painful winds of parturition; and the infant losing for 
a time all sensation, when brought in contact with the external air, is 
immediately deprived of its intellectual knowledge. Thus born, the child is 
tortured in every limb, as if pierced with thorns, or cut to pieces with a saw, and 
falls from its fetid lodgment, as from a sore, like a crawling thing upon the earth. 
Unable to feel itself, unable to turn itself, it is dependent upon the will of others 
for being bathed and nourished. Laid upon a dirty bed, it is bitten by insects and 
musquitoes, and has not power to drive them away. Many are the pangs 
attending birth, and many are those which succeed to birth; and many are the 
sufferings which are inflicted by elemental and superhuman agency in the state 
of childhood. Enveloped by the gloom of ignorance, and internally bewildered, 
man knows not whence he is, who he is, whither he goeth, nor what is his nature; 
by what bonds he is bound; what is cause, and what is not cause; what is to be 
done, and what is to be left undone; what is to be said, and what is to be kept 
silent; what is righteousness, what is iniquity; in what it consists, or how; what is 
right, what is wrong; what is virtue, what is vice. Thus man, like a brute beast, 
addicted only to animal gratifications, suffers the pain that ignorance occasions. 
Ignorance, darkness, inactivity, influence those devoid of knowledge, so that 
pious works are neglected; but hell is the consequence of neglect of religious 
acts, according to the great sages, and the ignorant therefore suffer affliction both 
in this world and in the next. 

When old age arrives, the body is infirm; the limbs are relaxed; the face is 
emaciate and shrivelled; the skin is wrinkled, and scantily covers the veins and 
sinews; the eye discerns not afar off, and the pupil gazes on vacuity; the nostrils 
are stuffed with hair; the trunk trembles as it moves; the bones appear beneath 
the surface; the back is bowed, and the joints are bent; the digestive fire is 
extinct, and there is little appetite and little vigour; walking, rising, sleeping, 
sitting, are all painful efforts; the ear is dull; the eye is dim; the mouth is 
disgusting with dribbling saliva; the senses no longer are obedient to the will; 
and as death approaches, the things that are perceived even are immediately 
forgotten. The utterance of a single sentence is fatiguing, and wakefulness is 
perpetuated by difficult breathing, coughing, and painful exhaustion. The old 
man is lifted up by somebody else; he is clothed by somebody else; he is an 
object of contempt to his servants, his children, and his wife. Incapable of 
cleanliness, of amusement, or food, or desire, he is laughed at by his dependants, 



and disregarded by his kin; and dwelling on the exploits of his youth, as on the 
actions of a past life, he sighs deeply, and is sorely distressed. Such are some of 
the pains which old age is condemned to suffer. I will now describe to you the 
agonies of death. 

The neck droops; the feet and hands are relaxed; the body trembles; the man is 
repeatedly exhausted, subdued, and visited with interrupted knowledge; the 
principle of selfishness afflicts him, and he thinks what will become of my 
wealth, my lands, my children, my wife, my servants, my house? the joints of his 
limbs are tortured with severe pains, as if cut by a saw, or as if they were pierced 
by the sharp arrows of the destroyer; he rolls his eyes, and tosses about his hands 
and feet; his lips and palate are parched and dry, and his throat, obstructed by 
foul humours and deranged vital airs, emits a rattling sound; he is afflicted with 
burning heat, and with thirst, and with hunger; and he at last passes away, 

r 

tortured by the servants of the judge of the dead, to undergo a renewal of his 
sufferings in another body. These are the agonies which men have to endure 
when they die. I will now describe to you the tortures which they suffer in hell. 

Men are bound, when they die, by the servants of the king of Tartarus with 
cords, and beaten with sticks, and have then to encounter the fierce aspect of 
Yama, and the horrors of their terrible route. In the different hells there are 
various intolerable tortures with burning sand, fire, machines, and weapons; 
some are severed with saws, some roasted in forges, some are chopped with 
axes, some buried in the ground, some are mounted on stakes, some cast to wild 
beasts to be devoured, some are gnawed by vultures, some torn by tigers, some 
are boiled in oil, some rolled in caustic slime, some are precipitated from great 
heights, some tossed upwards by engines. The number of punishments inflicted 
in hell, which are the consequences of sin, is infinite. 

But not in hell alone do the souls of the deceased undergo pain: there is no 
cessation even in heaven; for its temporary inhabitant is ever tormented with the 
prospect of descending again to earth. Again is he liable to conception and to 
birth; he is merged again into the embryo, and repairs to it when about to be 
born; then he dies, as soon as born, or in infancy, or in youth, or in manhood, or 
in old age. Death, sooner or later, is inevitable. As long as he lives he is 
immersed in manifold afflictions, like the seed of the cotton amidst the down 
that is to be spun into thread. In acquiring, losing, and preserving wealth there 



are many griefs; and so there are in the misfortunes of our friends. Whatever is 
produced that is most acceptable to man, that, Maitreya, becomes a seed whence 
springs the tree of sorrow. Wife, children, servants, house, lands, riches, 
contribute much more to the misery than to the happiness of mankind. Where 
could man, scorched by the fires of the sun of this world, look for felicity, were it 
not for the shade afforded by the tree of emancipation? Attainment of the divine 
being is considered by the wise as the remedy of the threefold class of ills that 
beset the different stages of life, conception, birth, and decay, as characterized by 
that only happiness which effaces all other kinds of felicity, however abundant, 
and as being absolute and final. 

It should therefore be the assiduous endeavour of wise men to attain unto god. 
The means of such attainment are said, great Muni, to be knowledge and works. 
Knowledge is of two kinds, that which is derived from scripture, and that which 
is derived from reflection. Brahma that is the word is composed of scripture; 
Brahma that is supreme is produced of reflection. Ignorance is utter darkness, in 
which knowledge, obtained through any sense (as that of hearing), shines like a 
lamp; but the knowledge that is derived from reflection breaks upon the 
obscurity like the sun. What has been said by Manu, when appealing to the 
meaning of the Vedas with respect to this subject, I will repeat to you. There are 
two (forms of) spirit (or god), the spirit which is the word, and the spirit which is 
supreme. He who is thoroughly imbued with the word of god obtains supreme 
spirit. The Atharva Veda also states that there are two kinds of knowledge; by 
the one, which is the supreme, god is attained; the other is that which consists of 
the Rich and other Vedas. That which is imperceptible, undecaying, 
inconceivable, unborn, inexhaustible, indescribable; which has neither form, nor 
hands, nor feet; which is almighty, omnipresent, eternal; the cause of all things, 
and without cause; permeating all, itself unpenetrated, and from which all things 
proceed; that is the object which the wise behold, that is Brahma, that is the 
supreme state, that is the subject of contemplation to those who desire liberation, 
that is the thing spoken of by the Vedas, the infinitely subtile, supreme condition 
of Vishnu. That essence of the supreme is defined by the term Bhagavat the 
word Bhagavat is the denomination of that primeval and eternal god: and he who 
fully understands the meaning of that expression, is possessed of holy wisdom, 
the sum and substance of the three Vedas. The word Bhagavat is a convenient 
form to be used in the adoration of that supreme being, to whom no term is 
applicable; and therefore Bhagavat expresses that supreme spirit, which is 



individual, almighty, and the cause of causes of all things. The letter Bh implies 
the cherisher and supporter of the universe. By ga is understood the leader, 
impeller, or creator. The dissyllable Bhaga indicates the six properties, dominion, 
might, glory, splendour, wisdom, and dispassion. The purport of the letter va is 
that elemental spirit in which all beings exist, and which exists in all beings. And 
thus this great word Bhagavan is the name of Vasudeva, who is one with the 
supreme Brahma, and of no one else. This word therefore, which is the general 
denomination of an adorable object, is not used in reference to the supreme in a 
general, but a special signification. When applied to any other (thing or person) 
it is used in its customary or general import. In the latter case it may purport one 
who knows the origin and end and revolutions of beings, and what is wisdom, 
what ignorance. In the former it denotes wisdom, energy, power, dominion, 
might, glory, without end, and without defect. 

The term Vasudeva means that all beings abide in that supreme being, and that 
he abides in all beings, as was formerly explained by Kesidhwaja to Khandikya, 
called Janaka, when he inquired of him an explanation of the name of the 
immortal, Vasudeva. He said, "He dwelleth internally in all beings, and all things 
dwell in him; and thence the lord Vasudeva is the creator and preserver of the 
world. He, though one with all beings, is beyond and separate from material 
nature (Prakriti), front its products, from properties, from imperfections: he is 
beyond all investing substance: he is universal soul; all the interstices of the 
universe are filled up by him: he is one with all good qualities; and all created 
beings are endowed with but a small portion of his individuality. Assuming at 
will various forms, he bestows benefits on the whole world, which was his work. 
Glory, might, dominion, wisdom, energy, power, and other attributes, are 
collected in him. Supreme of the supreme, in whom no imperfections abide, lord 
over finite and infinite, god in individuals and universals, visible and invisible, 
omnipotent, omnipresent, omniscient, almighty. The wisdom, perfect, pure, 
supreme, undefiled, and one only, by which he is conceived, contemplated, and 
known, that is wisdom; all else is ignorance." 


Footnotes 


01. The three kinds of affliction, inseparable, incidental, and superhuman, are 
fully described in the commentary on the first verse of the Sankhya 
Karika in a similar strain as that which is adopted in the text. 

02. Some further particulars of the different hells, and the punishments 
inflicted in them, have been given before. 

03. All this is conformable to the Sankhya doctrines in particular, although 
the same spirit pervades all Hindu metaphysics. 

04. Tasmat Tat praptaye yatna kartavya pariditairnaraih. The expression Tat 
praptaye, 'for the obtaining of that,' refers to the phrase immediately 
preceding, Bhagavatprapti, 'obtaining of,' or 'attaining to, Bhagavat,' the 
lord. 

05. Brahma is of two kinds; Sabda-Brahma, spirit or god to be attained 
through the word, that is, the Vedas and the duties they prescribe; and 
Para-Brahma, spirit or god to be attained through reflection, by which the 
difference between soul and matter is ascertained. 

06. This seems intended as a quotation from Manu, but it has not been found 
in the code; it is ###. 

07. The commentator quotes other passages from the Vedas of a similar 
tendency, intimating, however, the necessity of performing acts prior to 
attaining knowledge; as, 'The decoction (preparatory process) being 
digested by rites, thereafter knowledge is the supreme resource.' 'Having 
crossed the gulph of death by ignorance (ceremonial acts), man obtains 
immortality by (holy) knowledge.' 

08. According to the comment, allusion is here made to the twelve syllable 
Mantra, or mystic formula addressed to Vishnu: 'Om Bhagavate 
Vasudevaya nama; 'Om! salutation to Bhagavat Vasudeva:' the repetition 
of which, by those devoted (bhakta) to Vishnu, is the easy mode of 
securing their liberation." The mysticism is, however, no doubt older than 
the worship of Vishnu; and the term Bhagavat is defined in the text 
according to the interpretation of the Vedas. 

09. The commentator says these interpretations are from the Nirukta, the 
glossary of the Vedas. The more etymological derivation of the term is, 
Bhaga, 'power,' 'authority,' and vat possessive affix. 

10. From the root Vas, 'abiding,' 'dwelling' 





06. Chapter 


Means of attaining liberation. Anecdotes of Khandikya and Kesidhwaja. The 
former instructs the latter how to atone for permitting the death of a cow. 
Kesidhwaja offers him a requital, and he desires to be instructed in spiritual 
knowledge. 

HE, Purushottama, is also known by holy study and devout meditation; and 
either, as the cause of attaining him, is entitled Brahma. From study let a man 
proceed to meditation, and from meditation to study by perfection in both 
supreme spirit becomes manifest. Study is one eye wherewith to behold it, and 
meditation is the other: he who is one with Brahma sees not with the eye of 
flesh. 

MAITREYA.—Reverend teacher, I am desirous of being informed what is meant 
by the term meditation (Yoga), by understanding which I may behold the 
supreme being, the upholder of the universe. 

PARASARA.—I will repeat to you, Maitreya, the explanation formerly given by 
Kesidhwaja to the magnanimous Khandikya, also called Janaka. 

MAITREYA.—Tell me first, Brahman, who Khandikya was, and who was 
Kesidhwaja; and how it happened that a conversation relating to the practice of 
Yoga occurred between them. 

PARASARA.— 1 There was Janaka, named Dharmadhwaja, who had two sons, 
Amitadhwaja and Kritadhwaja; and the latter was a king ever intent upon 
existent supreme spirit: his son was the celebrated Kesidhwaja. The son of 
Amitadhwaja was Janaka, called Khandikya. 

Khandikya was diligent in the way of works, and was renowned on earth for 
religious rites. Kesidhwaja, on the other hand, was endowed with spiritual 
knowledge. These two were engaged in hostilities, and Khandikya was driven 
from his principality by Kesidhwaja. Expelled from his dominions, he wandered 
with a few followers, his priest and his counsellors, amidst woods and 


mountains, where, destitute of true wisdom, he performed many sacrifices, 
expecting thereby to obtain divine truth, and to escape from death by ignorance. 


Once whilst the best of those who are skilled in devotion, Kesidhwaja, was 
engaged in devout exercises, a fierce tiger slew his milch cow in the lonely 
forest. When the Raja heard that the cow had been killed, he asked the 
ministering priests what form of penance would expiate the crime. They replied 
that they did not know, and referred him to Kaseru. Kaseru, when the Raja 
consulted him, told him that he knew not, but that Sunaka would be able to tell 
him. Accordingly the Raja went to Sunaka; but he replied, "I am as unable, great 
king, to answer your question as Kaseru has been; and there is no one now upon 
earth who can give you the information except your enemy Khandikya, whom 
you have conquered." 

Upon receiving this answer, Kesidhwaja said, "I will go, then, and pay a visit to 
my foe: if he kill me, no matter, for then I shall obtain the reward that attends 
being killed in a holy cause: if, on the contrary, he tell me what penance to 
perform, then my sacrifice will be unimpaired in efficacy." Accordingly he 
ascended his car, having clothed himself in the deer skin (of the religious 
student), and went to the forest where the wise Khandikya resided. When 
Khandikya beheld him approach, his eyes reddened with rage, and he took up his 
bow, and said to him, "You have armed yourself with the deer skin to accomplish 
my destruction, imagining that in such an attire you will be safe from me; but, 
fool, the deer, upon whose backs this skin is seen, are slain by you and me with 
sharp arrows: so will I slay you; you shall not go free whilst I am living. You are 
an unprincipled felon, who have robbed me of my kingdom, and are deserving of 
death." To this Kesidhwaja answered, "I have come hither, Khandikya, to ask 
you to solve my doubts, and not with any hostile intention: lay aside therefore 
both your arrow and your anger." Thus spoken to, Khandikya retired a while 
with his counsellors and his priest, and consulted with them what course to 
pursue. They strongly urged him to slay Kesidhwaja, who was now in his power, 
and by whose death he would again become the monarch of the whole earth. 
Khandikya replied to them, "It is no doubt true that by such an act I should 
become the monarch of the whole earth: he, however, would thereby conquer the 
world to come; whilst the earth would be mine. Now if I do not kill him, I shall 
subdue the next world, and leave him this earth. It seems to me that this world is 
not of more value than the next; for the subjugation of the next world endures for 



ever; the conquest over this is but for a brief season. I will therefore not kill him, 
but tell him what he wishes to know." 

Returning then to Kesidhwaja, Khandikya desired him to propose his question, 
which he promised to answer; and Kesidhwaja related to him what had 
happened, the death of the cow, and demanded to know what penance he should 
perform. Khandikya, in reply, explained to him fully the expiation that was 
suited to the occasion; and Kesidhwaja then, with his permission, returned to the 
place of sacrifice, and regularly fulfilled every necessary act. Having completed 
the ceremony, with its supplementary rites, Kesidhwaja accomplished all his 
objects: but he then reflected thus: "The priests whom I invited to attend have all 
been duly honoured; all those who had any request to make have been gratified 
by compliance with their desires; all that is proper for this world has been 
effected by me: why then should my mind feel as if my duty had been 
unfulfilled?" So meditating, he remembered that he had not presented to 
Khandikya the gift that it is becoming to offer to a spiritual preceptor, and, 
mounting his chariot, he immediately set off to the thick forest where that sage 
abode. Khandikya, upon his reappearance, assumed his weapons to kill him; but 
Kesidhwaja exclaimed, "Forbear, venerable sage. I am not here to injure you, 
Khandikya: dismiss your wrath, and know that I have come hither to offer you 
that remuneration which is due to you as my instructor. Through your lessons I 
have fully completed my sacrifice, and I am therefore desirous to give you a gift. 
Demand what it shall be." 

Khandikya having once more communed with his counsellors, told them the 
purpose of his rival's visit, and asked them what he should demand. His friends 
recommended him to require his whole kingdom back again, as kingdoms are 
obtained by prudent men without conflicting hosts. The reflecting king 
Khandikya laughed, and replied to them, "Why should a person such as I be 
desirous of a temporary earthly kingdom? Of a truth you are able counsellors in 
the concerns of this life, but of those of the life to cone you are assuredly 
ignorant." So speaking, he went back to Kesidhwaja, and said to him, "Is it true 
that you wish to make me a gift, as to your preceptor?" "Indeed I do," answered 
Kesidhwaja. "Then," rejoined Khandikya, "as it is known that you are learned in 
the spiritual learning that teaches the doctrine of the soul, if you will 
communicate that knowledge to me, you will have discharged your debt to your 
instructor. Declare to me what acts are efficacious for the alleviation of human 



affliction." 




Footnotes 

01. Both study of the Vedas (Swadhyaya) and abstraction (Yoga) are to be 
practised: when a man is weary of one, he may apply to the other. The 
Yoga, however, limits the practical part to silent prayer. 'Wearied of 
meditation, let him pray inaudibly: weary of prayer, let him repeat 
meditation.' 'By the union of prayer and meditation let him behold soul in 
himself.' 

02. No such names occur amongst the Maithila kings of the Vishnu Purana 
but, as there noticed (note 6), the Bhagavata inserts them. Janaka is used 
as a title. Kritadhwaja, in some of the copies, is read Ritadhwaja. 

03. The performance of rites as a means of salvation is called ignorance in 
the Vedas. Works are recommended as introductory to the acquirement of 
knowledge: it is ignorance to consider them as finite. 

04. Tasya-dhenum. One copy has Homa-dhenu, 'cow of sacrifice;' another, 
Dharma-dhenu, 'cow of righteousness.' The commentator explains the 
terms as importing the same thing, a cow yielding milk for holy 
purposes, or for the butter which is poured in oblations upon the 
sacrificial fire. 




07. Chapter 


Kesidhwaja describes the nature of ignorance, and the benefits of the Yoga, or 
contemplative devotion. Of the novice and the adept in the performance of the 
Yoga. How it is performed. The first stage, proficiency in acts of restraint and 
moral duty: the second, particular mode of sitting: the third, Pranayama, modes 
of breathing: the fourth, Pratyahara, restraint of thought: the fifth, apprehension 
of spirit: the sixth, retention of the idea. Meditation on the individual and 
universal forms of Vishnu. Acquirement of knowledge. Final liberation. 

"BUT," said Kesidhwaja, "why have you not asked of me my kingdom, now free 
from all annoyance? what else except dominion is acceptable to the warrior 
race?" "I will tell you," replied Khandikya, "why I did not make such a demand, 
nor require that territory which is an object of ignorant ambition. It is the duty of 
the warrior to protect his subjects in peace, and to kill in fight the enemies of his 
sway. It is no fault that you should have taken my kingdom from one who was 
unable to defend it, to whom it was a bondage, and who was thus freed from the 
incumbrance of ignorance. My desire of dominion originated in my being born 
to possess it: the ambition of others, which proceeds from human frailties, is not 
compatible with virtue. To solicit gifts is not the duty of a prince and warrior: 
and for these reasons I have not asked for your kingdom, nor made a demand 
which ignorance alone would have suggested. Those only who are destitute of 
knowledge, whose minds are engrossed by selfishness, who are intoxicated with 
the inebriating beverage of self-sufficiency, desire kingdoms; not such as I am." 

When king Kesidhwaja heard these words, he was much pleased, and exclaimed, 
"It is well spoken!" Then addressing Khandikya affectionately, he said, "Listen 
to my words. Through desire of escaping death by the ignorance of works I 
exercise the regal power, celebrate various sacrifices, and enjoy pleasures 
subversive of purity. Fortunate is it for you that your mind has attached itself to 
the dominion of discrimination. Pride of your race! now listen to the real nature 
of ignorance. The (erroneous) notion that self consists in what is not self, and the 
opinion that property consists in what is not one's own, constitute the double 
seed of the tree of ignorance. The ill judging embodied being, bewildered by the 
darkness of fascination, situated in a body composed of the five elements, loudly 


asserts, 'This is I:' but who would ascribe spiritual individuality to a body in 
which soul is distinct from the ether, air, fire, water, and earth (of which that 
body is composed)? What man of understanding assigns to disembodied spirit 
corporeal fruition, or lands, houses, and the like, that it should say, 'These are 
mine?' What wise man entertains the idea of property in sous or grandsons 
begotten of the body after the spirit has abandoned it? Man performs all acts for 
the purpose of bodily fruition, and the consequence of such acts is another body; 
so that their result is nothing but confinement to bodily existence. In the same 
manner as a mansion of clay is plastered with clay and water, so the body, which 
is of earth, is perpetuated by earth and water (or by eating and drinking). The 
body, consisting of the five elements, is nourished by substances equally 
composed of those elements: but since this is the case, what is there in this life 
that man should be proud of? Travelling the path of the world for many 
thousands of births, man attains only the weariness of bewilderment, and is 
smothered by the dust of imagination. When that dust is washed away by the 
bland water of real knowledge, then the weariness of bewilderment sustained by 
the wayfarer through repeated births is removed. When that weariness is 
relieved, the internal man is at peace, and he obtains that supreme felicity which 
is unequalled and undisturbed. This soul is (of its own nature) pure, and 
composed of happiness and wisdom. The properties of pain, ignorance, and 
impurity, are those of nature (Prakriti), not of soul. There is no affinity between 
fire and water, but when the latter is placed over the former in a caldron it 
bubbles and boils, and exhibits the properties of fire. In like manner, when soul 
is associated with Prakriti it is vitiated by egotism and the rest, and assumes the 
qualities of grosser nature, although essentially distinct from them, and 
incorruptible. Such is the seed of ignorance, as I have explained it to you. There 
is but one cure of worldly sorrows, the practice of devotion; no other is known." 

"Then," said Kharidikya, "do you, who are the chief of those versed in 
contemplative devotion, explain to me what that is; for in the race of the 
descendants of Nimi you are best acquainted with the sacred writings in which it 
is taught." "Hear," replied Kesidhwaja, "the account of, the nature of 
contemplative devotion, which I impart to you, and by perfection in which the 
sage attains resolution into Brahma, and never suffers birth again. The mind of 
man is the cause both of his bondage and his liberation: its addiction to the 
objects of sense is the means of his bondage; its separation from objects of sense 
is the means of his freedom. The sage who is capable of discriminative 



knowledge must therefore restrain his mind from all the objects of sense, and 
therewith meditate upon the supreme being, who is one with spirit, in order to 
attain liberation; for that supreme spirit attracts to itself him who meditates upon 
it, and who is of the same nature, as the loadstone attracts the iron by the virtue 
which is common to itself and to its products. Contemplative devotion is the 
union with Brahma, effected by that condition of mind which has attained 
perfection through those exercises which complete the control of self and he 
whose contemplative devotion is characterized by the property of such absolute 
perfection, is in truth a sage, expectant of final liberation from the world. 

"The sage, or Yogi, when first applying himself to contemplative devotion is 
called the novice or practitioner (Yoga yuj); when he has attained spiritual union 
he is termed the adept, or he whose meditations are accomplished. Should the 
thoughts of the former be unvitiated by any obstructing imperfection, he will 
obtain freedom, after practising devotion through several lives. The latter 
speedily obtains liberation in that existence (in which he reaches perfection), all 
his acts being consumed by the fire of contemplative devotion. The sage who 
would bring his mind into a fit state for the performance of devout 
contemplation must be devoid of desire, and observe invariably continence, 
compassion, truth, honesty, and disinterestedness: he must fix his mind intently 
on the supreme Brahma, practising holy study, purification, contentment, 
penance, and self-control. These virtues, respectively termed the five acts of 
restraint (Yana), and five of obligation (Niyama), bestow excellent rewards when 
practised for the sake of reward, and eternal liberation when they are not 
prompted by desire (of transient benefits). Endowed with these merits, the sage 
self restrained should sit in one of the modes termed Bhadrasana, &c., and 
engage in contemplation. Bringing his vital airs, called Prana, under subjection, 
by frequent repetition, is thence called Pranayama, which is as it were a seed 
with a seed. In this the breath of expiration and that of inspiration are alternately 
obstructed, constituting the act twofold; and the suppression of both modes of 
breathing produces a third. The exercise of the Yogi, whilst endeavouring to 
bring before his thoughts the gross form of the eternal, is denominated 
Alambana. He is then to perform the Pratyahara, which consists in restraining his 
organs of sense from susceptibility to outward impressions, and directing them 
entirely to mental perceptions. By these means the entire subjugation of the 
unsteady senses is effected; and if they are not controlled, the sage will not 
accomplish his devotions. When by the Pranayama the vital airs are restrained, 



and the senses are subjugated by the Pratyahara, then the sage will he able to 
keep his mind steady in its perfect asylum." 

Khandikya then said to Kesidhwaja, "Illustrious sage, inform me what is that 
perfect asylum of the mind, resting on which it destroys all the products of 
(human) infirmity." To this, Kesidhwaja replied, "The asylum of mind is spirit 
(Brahma), which of its own nature is twofold, as being with or without form; and 
each of these is supreme and secondary. Apprehension of spirit, again, is 
threefold. I will explain the different kinds to you: they are, that which is called 
Brahma, that which is named from works, and that which comprehends both. 
That mental apprehension which consists of Brahma is one; that which is formed 
of works is another; and that which comprehends both is the third: so that mental 
apprehension (of the object or asylum of the thoughts) is threefold. Sanandana 
and other (perfect sages) were endowed with apprehension of the nature of 
Brahma. The gods and others, whether animate or inanimate, are possessed of 
that which regards acts. The apprehension that comprehends both works and 
spirit exists in Hiranyagarbha and others, who are possessed of contemplative 
knowledge of their own nature, and who also exercise certain active functions, as 
creation and the rest. Until all acts, which are the causes of notions of 
individuality, are discontinued, spirit is one thing, and the universe is another, to 
those who contemplate objects as distinct and various; but that is called true 
knowledge, or knowledge of Brahma, which recognises no distinctions, which 
contemplates only simple existence, which is undefinable by words, and is to be 
discovered solely in one's own spirit. That is the supreme, unborn, imperishable 
form of Vishnu, who is without (sensible) form, and is characterised as a 
condition of the supreme soul, which is variously modified from the condition of 
universal form. But this condition cannot be contemplated by sages in their 
(early) devotions, and they must therefore direct their minds to the gross form of 
Hari, which is of universal perceptibility. They must meditate upon him as 
Hiranyagarbha, as the glorious Vasava, as Prajapati, as the winds, the Vasus, the 
Rudras, the suns, stars, planets, Gandharbas, Yakshas, Daityas, all the gods and 
their progenitors, men, animals, mountains, oceans, rivers, trees, all beings, and 
all sources of beings, all modifications whatever of nature and its products, 
whether sentient or unconscious, one-footed, two-footed, or many-footed; all 
these are the sensible form of Hari, to be apprehended by the three kinds of 
apprehension. All this universal world, this world of moving and stationary 
beings, is pervaded by the energy of Vishnu, who is of the nature of the supreme 



Brahma. This energy is either supreme, or, when it is that of conscious embodied 
spirit, it is secondary. Ignorance, or that which is denominated from works, is a 
third energy by which the omnipresent energy of embodied spirit is ever excited, 
and whence it suffers all the pains of repeated worldly existence. Obscured by 
that energy (of ignorance or illusion), the energy that is denominated from 
embodied spirit is characterised by different degrees of perfection in all created 
beings. In things without life it exists in a very small degree: it is more in things 
that have life, but are (without motion): in insects it is still more abundant, and 
still more in birds; it is more in wild animals, and in domestic animals the faculty 
is still greater: men have more of this (spiritual), faculty than animals, and 
thence arises their authority over them: the faculty exists in an ascending degree 
in Nagas, Gandharbas, Yakshas, gods, Sakra, Prajapati, and Hiranyagarbha: and 
is above all predominant in that male (Vishnu) of whom all these various 
creatures are but the diversified forms, penetrated universally by his energy, as 
all-pervading as the ether. 

"The second state of him who is called Vishnu, and which is to be meditated 
upon by the (advanced) sage, is that imperceptible, shapeless form of Brahma, 
which is called by the wise, 'That which is ' and in which all the before described 
energies reside. Thence proceeds the form of the universal form, the other great 
form of Hari, which is the origin of those manifested forms (or incarnations) that 
are endowed with every kind of energy, and which, whether the forms of gods, 
animals, or men, are assumed by him (Hari) in his sport. This active interposition 
of the undefinable god, all-comprehending and irresistible, is for the purpose of 
benefiting the world, and is not the necessary consequence of works. This form 
of the universal form is to be meditated upon by the sage for the object of 
purification, as it destroys all sin. In the same manner as fire, blazing in the 
wind, burns dry grass, so Vishnu, seated in the heart, consumes the sins of the 
sage; and therefore let him resolutely effect the fixation of his mind upon that 
receptacle of all the three energies (Vishnu), for that is the operation of the mind 
which is called perfect Dharana and thus the perfect asylum of individual as well 
as universal spirit, that which is beyond the three modes of apprehension, is 
attained, for the eternal emancipation of the sage. The minds of other beings, 
which are not fixed upon that asylum, are altogether impure, and are all the gods 
and the rest, who spring from acts. The retention or apprehension by the mind of 
that visible form of Vishnu, without regard to subsidiary forms, is thence called 
Dharana; and I will describe to you the perceptible form of Hari, which no 



mental retention will manifest, except in a mind that is fit to become the 
receptacle of the idea. The meditating sage must think (he beholds internally the 
figure) of Vishnu, as having a pleased and lovely countenance, with eyes like the 
leaf of the lotus, smooth cheeks, and a broad and brilliant forehead; ears of equal 
size, the lobes of which are decorated with splendid pendants; a painted neck, 
and a broad breast, on which shines the Srivatsa mark; a belly falling in graceful 
folds, with a deep-seated navel; eight long arms, or else four; and firm and well- 
knit thighs and legs, with well-formed feet and toes. Let him, with well- 
governed thoughts, contemplate, as long as he can persevere in unremitting 
attention, Hari as clad in a yellow robe, wearing a rich diadem on his head, and 
brilliant armlets and bracelets on his arms, and bearing in his hands the bow, the 
shell, the mace, the sword, the discus, the rosary, the lotus, and the arrow. When 
this image never departs from his mind, whether he be going or standing, or be 
engaged in any other voluntary act, then he may believe his retention to be 
perfect. The sage may then meditate upon the form of Vishnu without his arms, 
as the shell, mace, discus, and bow; and as placid, and bearing only his rosary. 
When the idea of this image is firmly retained, then he may meditate on Vishnu 
without his diadem, bracelets, or other ornaments. He may next contemplate him 
as having but one single limb, and may then fix his whole thoughts upon the 
body to which the limbs belong. This process of forming a lively image in the 
mind, exclusive of all other objects, constitutes Dhyana, or meditation, which is 
perfected by six stages and when an accurate knowledge of self, free from all 
distinction, is attained by this mental meditation, that is termed Samadhi. 

"(When the Yogi has accomplished this stage, he acquires) discriminative 
knowledge, which is the means of enabling living soul, when all the three kinds 
of apprehension are destroyed, to attain the attainable supreme Brahma. 
Embodied spirit is the user of the instrument, which instrument is true 
knowledge; and by it that (identification) of the former (with Brahma) is 
attained. Liberation, which is the object to be effected, being accomplished, 
discriminative knowledge ceases. When endowed with the apprehension of the 
nature of the object of inquiry, then, there is no difference between it (individual 
and) supreme spirit: difference is the consequence of the absence of (true) 
knowledge. When that ignorance which is the cause of the difference between 
individual and universal spirit is destroyed finally and for ever, who shall ever 
make that distinction between them which does not exist? Thus have I, 
Khandikya, in reply to your question, explained to you what is meant by 



contemplative devotion, both fully and summarily. What else do you wish to 
hear?" 

Khandikya replied to Kesidhwaja, and said, "The explanation which you have 
given me of the real nature of contemplative devotion has fulfilled all my 
wishes, and removed all impurity from my mind. The expression 'mine,' which I 
have been accustomed to use, is untruth, and cannot be otherwise declared by 
those who know what is to be known. The words 'I' and 'mine' constitute 
ignorance; but practice is influenced by ignorance. Supreme truth cannot be 
defined, for it is not to be explained by words. Depart therefore, Kesidhwaja; 
you have done all that is necessary for my real happiness, in teaching me 
contemplative devotion, the inexhaustible bestower of liberation from 
existence." 

Accordingly king Kesidhwaja, after receiving suitable homage from Khandikya, 
returned to his city. Khandikya, having nominated his son Raja, retired to the 
woods to accomplish his devotions, his whole mind being intent upon Govinda: 
there his entire thoughts being engrossed upon one only object, and being 
purified by practices of restraint, self-control, and the rest, he obtained 
absorption into the pure and perfect spirit which is termed Vishnu. Kesidhwaja 
also, in order to attain liberation, became averse from his own perishable works, 
and lived amidst objects of sense (without regarding them), and instituted 
religious rites without expecting therefrom any advantages to himself. Thus by 
pure and auspicious fruition, being cleansed from all sin, the also obtained that 
perfection which assuages all affliction for ever. 


Footnotes 

01. The text is somewhat obscure, but it is in some degree cleared up by the 
next illustration. No one would think of applying the property of self—the 
idea of possession or personality—to soul, separated from body: but the 
objection is equally applicable to soul in the body; for whilst there it is as 
distinct in its nature from the materials of body as if it was disembodied, 
and quite as incapable of individual personal fruition. 


02. That is, in the race of princes of Mithila. 

03. The term Yoga, which is that used in the text, in its literal acceptation 
signifies 'union,' 'junction,' from ### 'to join:' in a spiritual sense it 
denotes 'union of separated with universal soul; and with some latitude of 
expression it comes to signify the means by which such union is affected. 
In the Bhagavad Gita it is variously applied, but ordinarily denotes the 
performance of religious ceremonies as a duty, and not for interested 
purposes. Thus Krishna says to Arjuna, "Engaging in Yoga, perform 
rites, Dhananjaya, being indifferent to success or failure: such 
indifference is called Yoga." II. v. 48. It is elsewhere defined, 'exemption 
from the contact of pain:' VI. v. 23. The word has been accordingly 
rendered 'devotion' by Wilkins, and 'devotio' by Schlegel, in their 
translations of the Gita. In this place, however, it is used in a less general 
sense, and signifies, as is subsequently explained, reunion with spirit 
through the exercises necessary to perfect abstraction as they are taught 
and practised by the followers of Patanjali. 

04. This illustration is however only to a limited extent, explanatory of the 
nature of Yoga; for though the loadstone and iron unite, by virtue of a 
community of kind, yet the union that takes place is only that of 
contiguity, Samyoga not that of identification or unity, Tadaikyam. Some 
further explanation therefore is required. 

05. The first stage is the Atma prayatna, the practice of moral and religious 
restraint, Yama, Niyama, &c. When the novice is perfect in these, then he 
is fit to attain the perfectibility of an adept, through the especial practices 
which treatises on the Yoga prescribe. When the mind has attained the 
state which can alone be attained through them, then the union with 
Brahma, which is the consequence, is called Yoga: ###. The Atma 
prayatna is defined to be that which has Yama, &c. for its object. The 
next phrase is explained, 'depending upon, or relating to, such control.' 
### is the same as ### condition or state of mind which is ### perfected: 
of that state of mind, union with Brahma, is Yoga. Union with Brahma is 
the abstraction that proposes the identity of the living with the supreme 
spirit of the Jivatma, with Brahma; and Yoga is understanding of the 
identity of the contemplator and the object contemplated. A text of 
Yajnyawalkya is quoted to this effect: 'Know holy wisdom to be the same 
with Yoga, (the practice of) which has eight divisions. That which is 
termed Yoga is union of the living with the supreme soul.' 






06. Vinishpannasamadhi is the expression of the text, which can scarcely be 
regarded as an appellative. The commentator terms the adept 
Brahmajnani, 'He who knows Brahma.' 

07. After three lives, according to the Vayu Sanhita, as quoted in the 
comment. 

08. There are various postures in which the Yogi is directed to sit when he 
engages in meditation. In the Bhadrasana he is directed to cross his legs 
underneath him, and to lay hold of his feet on each side with his hands. 

09. It is itself figuratively the seed of the fruit, which is meditation; but it is 
to be accompanied with what is also technically called Bija, or seed, 
inaudible repetition of certain prayers, and meditation on the visible form 
of the deity, termed likewise Alambana, and presently mentioned. 

10. Pranayama is performed by three modifications of breathing: the first act 
is expiration, which is performed through the right nostril, whilst the left 
is closed with the fingers of the right hand; this is called Rechaka: the 
thumb is then placed upon the right nostril, and the fingers raised from 
the left, through which breath is inhaled; this is called Puraka: in the third 
act both nostrils are closed, and breathing suspended; this is Kumbhaka: 
and a succession of these operations is the practice of Pranayama. 

11. Alambana is the silent repetition of prayer. 

12. The Brahma that is without form (Amurtta) may be Para or Apara. 
Supreme formless spirit is, without attributes of any kind. Secondary 
formless spirit is invested with the attributes of power, glory, truth, 
perfection. Spirit embodied, or with form in his highest state, is, 
according to our text, Vishnu, and his manifestations. Spirit in an inferior 
or secondary series of bodily forms is Brahma and all other living beings. 

13. The term is Bhavana, defined to be, 'function to be engendered by 
knowledge;' the mental impression or apprehension following upon 
knowledge.' Here it implies in particular the formation of a fixed idea by 
the Yogi of the object of his contemplations. It is also termed Bhava- 
bhavana, 'apprehension of the being, the existence, or substantiality, of 
the object; the thing contemplated.' 

14. The term used throughout is Sakti, power,' 'ability,' 'energy' By the first 
kind, or Para, is understood knowledge able to appreciate abstract truth, 
or the nature of universal soul; by the second, ability to understand the 
nature of embodied soul; and by the third, inability to discern one's own 
nature, and reliance on moral or ceremonial merit. These different kinds 


are called energies, because they are the energies or faculties of the 
supreme spirit, or, according to the Vaishriavas, of Vishnu, accompanying 
soul in all its various conditions of existence. 

15. 656:15 The first, which has been intended to be described in the 
foregoing passages, was the universal, visible form of Vishnu; the second 
is his formless or imperceptible condition. 

16. Sat 'what is being.' 

17. Retention, or holding of the image or idea formed in the mind by 
contemplation: from Dhri, 'to hold,' literally or figuratively. 

18. The explanation of Dharana given in the text is rendered unnecessarily 
perplexed by the double doctrine here taught, and the attempt to combine 
the abstractions of Yoga theism with the sectarian worship of Vishnu. 

19. The two last implements are from the comment; the text specifies only 
six. 

20. They are, 1. Yama &c., acts of restraint and obligation; 2. Asana, sitting 
in particular postures; 3. Prariayama, modes of breathing; 4. Pratyahara, 
exclusion of all external ideas; 5. Bhavana, apprehension of internal 
ideas; 6. Dharana, fixation or retention of those ideas. 

21. The result of the Dhyana or Samadhi is the absence of all idea of 
individuality, when the meditator, the meditation, and the thing or object 
meditated upon, are all considered to be but one. According to the text of 
Patanjali: 'Restraint of the body, retention of the mind, and meditation, 
which thence is exclusively confined to one object, is Dhyana: the idea of 
identification with the object of such meditation, so as if devoid of 
individual nature, is Samadhi.' 

22. The expressions of the text are somewhat obscure, nor does the 
commentator make them much more intelligible, until he cuts the matter 
short by stating the meaning to be, that 'discriminative knowledge 
enables the living spirit to attain Brahma.' 

23. The text is very elliptical and obscure. Having stated that embodied spirit 
(Kshetrajna) is the Karariin, the possessor or user of the Karana, which is 
knowledge, it adds, ### literally, 'by that, of that, that;' i. e. Tat, 'that 
which is; and Brahma, or supreme spirit, is the attainment of that spirit 
which abides in body by that instrument, or discriminative knowledge, of 
which it has become possessed through perfect meditation. 

24. The commentator, in order to explain how Kharidikya should have given 
what he did not possess, states that it is to be understood that Kesidhwaja 



relinquished to him the kingdom; or the term Raja may denote merely, 
master of, or acquainted with, mystic prayers, or Mantras. 




08. Chapter 


Conclusion of the dialogue between Parasara and Maitreya. Recapitulation of the 
contents of the Vishnu Purana: merit of hearing it: how handed down. Praises of 
Vishnu. Concluding prayer. 

I HAVE now explained to you, Maitreya, the third kind of worldly dissolution, 
or that which is absolute and final, which is, liberation and resolution into eternal 
spirit. I have related to you primary and secondary creation, the families of the 
patriarchs, the periods of the Manwantaras, and the genealogical histories (of the 
kings). I have repeated to you, in short, who were desirous of hearing it, the 
imperishable Vaishnava Purana, which is destructive of all sins, the most 
excellent of all holy writings, and the means of attaining the great end of man. If 
there is any thing else you wish to hear, propose your question, and I will answer 
it. 

MAITREYA.—Holy teacher, you have indeed related to me all that I wished to 
know, and I have listened to it with pious attention. I have nothing further to 
inquire. The doubts inseparable from the mind of man have all been resolved by 
you, and through your instructions I am acquainted with the origin, duration, and 
end of all things; with Vishnu in his collective fourfold form his three energies 
and with the three modes of apprehending the object of contemplation. Of all 
this have I acquired a knowledge through your favour, and nothing else is worthy 
to be known, when it is once understood that Vishnu and this world are not 
mutually distinct. Great Muni, I have obtained through your kindness all I 
desired, the dissipation of my doubts, since you have instructed me in the duties 
of the several tribes, and in other obligations; the nature of active life, and 
discontinuance of action; and the derivation of all that exists from works. There 
is nothing else, venerable Brahman, that I have to inquire of you; and forgive me 
if your answers to my questions have imposed upon you any fatigue. Pardon me 
the trouble that I have given you, through that amiable quality of the virtuous - 
which makes no distinction between a disciple and a child. 

PARASARA.—I have related to you this Purana, which is equal to the Vedas in 
sanctity, and by hearing which all faults and sins whatever are expiated. In this 


have been described to you the primary and secondary creation, the families of 
the patriarchs, the Manwantaras, the regal dynasties; the gods, Daityas, 
Gandharbas, serpents, Rakshasas, Yakshas, Vidyadharas, Siddhas, and heavenly 
nymphs; Munis endowed with spiritual wisdom, and practisers of devotion; the 
distinctions of the four castes, and the actions of the most eminent amongst men; 
holy places on the earth, holy rivers and oceans, sacred mountains, and legends 
of the truly wise; the duties of the different tribes, and the observances enjoined 
by the Vedas. By hearing this, all sins are at once obliterated. In this also the 
glorious Hari has been revealed, the cause of the creation, preservation, and 
destruction of the world; the soul of all things, and himself all things: by the 
repetition of whose name man is undoubtedly liberated from all sins, which fly 
like wolves that are frightened by a lion. The repetition of his name with devout 
faith is the best remover of all sins, destroying them as fire purifies the metal 
from the dross. The stain of the Kali age, which ensures to men sharp 
punishments in hell, is at once effaced by a single invocation of Hari. He who is 
all that is, the whole egg of Brahma, with Hirariyagarbha, Indra, Rudra, the 
Adityas, the Aswins, the winds, the Kinnaras, the Vasus, the Sadhyas, 
Viswadevas, the celestial gods, the Yakshas, serpents, Rakshasas, the Siddhas, 
Daityas, Gandharbas, Danavas, nymphs, the stars, asterisms, planets, the seven 
Rishis, the regents and superintendants of the quarters, men, Brahmans and the 
rest, animals tame and wild, insects, birds, ghosts and goblins, trees, mountains, 
woods, rivers, oceans, the subterrene legions, the divisions of the earth, and all 
perceptible objects—he who is all things, who knoweth all things, who is the 
form of all things, being without form himself, and of whom whatever is, from 
mount Meru to an atom, all consists—he, the glorious Vishnu, the destroyer of all 
sin—is described in this Purana. By hearing this Purana an equal recompense is 
obtained to that which is derived from the performance of an Aswamedha 
sacrifice, or from fasting at the holy places Prayaga, Pushkara, Kurukshetra, or 
Arbuda. Hearing this Purana but once is as efficacious as the offering of 
oblations in a perpetual fire for a year. The man who with well-governed 

r 

passions bathes at Mathura on the twelfth day of the month Jyeshtha, and 
beholds (the image of) Hari, obtains a great recompense; so does he who with 
mind fixed upon Kesava attentively recites this Purana. The man who bathes in 
the waters of the Yamuna on the twelfth lunation of the light fortnight of the 

r 

month in which the moon is in the mansion Jyeshtha, and who fasts and 
worships Achyuta in the city of Mathura, receives the reward of an uninterrupted 
Aswamedha. Beholding the degree of prosperity enjoyed by others of eminence, 



through the merits of their descendants, a man's paternal ancestors, his parents 
and their parents, exclaim, "Whosoever of our descendants, having bathed in the 
Yamuna and fasted, will worship Govinda in Mathura, in the light fortnight of 

r 

Jyeshtha, will secure for us eminent exaltation; for we shall be elevated by the 
merits of our posterity!" A man of good extraction will present obsequial cakes 
to his fortunate ancestors in the Yamuna, having worshipped Janarddana in the 
light fortnight of Jyeshtha. But the same degree of merit that a man reaps front 
adoring Janarddana at that season with a devoted heart, and from bathing in the 
Yamuna, and effecting the liberation of his progenitors by offering to them on 
such an occasion obsequial cakes, he derives also from hearing with equal 
devotion a section of this Purana. This Purana is the best of all preservatives for 
those who are afraid of worldly existence, a certain alleviation of the sufferings 
of men, and remover of all imperfections. 

This Purana, originally composed by the Rishi (Narayaria), was communicated 
by Brahma to Ribhu; he related it to Priyavrata, by whom it was imparted to 
Bhaguri. Bhaguri recited it to Tamasitra, and he to Dadicha, who gave it to 
Saraswata. From the last Bhrigu received it, who imparted it to Purukutsa, and 
he taught it to Narmada. The goddess delivered it to Dhritarashtra the Naga king, 
and to Purana of the same race, by whom it was repeated to their monarch 
Vasuki. Vasuki communicated it to Vatsa, and he to Aswatara, from whom it 
successively proceeded to Kambala and Elapatra. When the Muni Vedasiras 
descended to Patala, he there received the whole Purana from these Nagas, and 
communicated it to Pramati. Pramati consigned it to the wise Jatukarria, and he 
taught it to many other holy persons. Through the blessing of Vasishtha it came 
to my knowledge, and I have now, Maitreya, faithfully imparted it to you. You 
will teach it, at the end of the Kali age, to Samika. Whoever hears this great 
mystery, which removes the contamination of the Kali, shall be freed from all his 
sins. He who hears this every day acquits himself of his daily obligations to 
ancestors, gods, and men. The great and rarely attainable merit that a man 
acquires by the gift of a brown cow, he derives from hearing ten chapters of this 
Purana. He who hears the entire Purana, contemplating in his mind Achyuta, 
who is all things, and of whom all things are made; who is the stay of the whole 
world, the receptacle of spirit; who is knowledge, and that which is to be known; 
who is without beginning or end, and the benefactor of the gods—obtains 
assuredly the reward that attends the uninterrupted celebration of the 
Aswamedha rite. He who reads and retains with faith this Purana, in the 



beginning, middle, and end of which is described the glorious Achyuta, the lord 
of the universe in every stage, the master of all that is stationary or moveable, 
composed of spiritual knowledge, acquires such purity as exists not in any 
world, the eternal state of perfection, which is Hari. The man who fixes his mind 
on Vishnu goes not to hell: he who meditates upon him regards heavenly 
enjoyment only as an impediment: and he whose mind and soul are penetrated 
by him thinks little of the world of Brahma; for when present in the minds of 
those whose intellects are free from soil, he confers upon them eternal freedom. 
What marvel therefore is it that the sins of one who repeats the name of Achyuta 
should be wiped away? Should not that Hari be heard of, whom those devoted to 
acts worship with sacrifices continually as the god of sacrifice; whom those 
devoted to meditation contemplate as primary and secondary, composed of spirit; 
by obtaining whom man is not born, nor nourished, nor subjected to death; who 
is all that is, and that is not (or both cause and of effect); who, as the progenitors, 
receives the libations made to them; who, as the gods, accepts the offerings 
addressed to them; the glorious being who is without beginning or end; whose 
name is both Swaha and Swadha who is the abode of all spiritual power; in 
whom the limits of finite things cannot be measured and who, when he enters the 
ear, destroys all sin? 

I adore him, that first of gods, Purushottama, who is without end and without 
beginning, without growth, without decay, without death; who is substance that 
knows not change. I adore that ever inexhaustible spirit; who assumed sensible 
qualities; who, though one, became many; who, though pure, became as if 
impure, by appearing in many and various shapes; who is endowed with divine 
wisdom, and is the author of the preservation of all creatures. I adore him, who is 
the one conjoined essence and object of both meditative wisdom and active 
virtue who is watchful in providing for human enjoyments; who is one with the 
three qualities; who, without undergoing change, is the cause of the evolution of 
the world; who exists of his own essence, ever exempt from decay. I constantly 
adore him, who is entitled heaven, air, fire, water, earth, and ether; who is the 
bestower of all the objects which give gratification to the senses; who benefits 
mankind with the instruments of fruition; who is perceptible, who is subtile, who 
is imperceptible. May that unborn, eternal Hari, whose form is manifold, and 
whose essence is composed of both nature and spirit, bestow upon all mankind 
that blessed state which knows neither birth nor decay! 





Footnotes 

01. The term is Brahmarii laya, which means, 'a melting away,' 'a dissolution' 
or 'fusion,' from the root, 'to liquefy,' 'to melt,' 'to dissolve.' 

02. Or with Vishnu in the four modifications described in the first section, 
spirit, matter, form, and time. 

03. Or Sakti, noticed in the last chapter. 

04. Or Bhavanas, also described in the preceding section. 

05. This month is also called Jyeshthamula, which the commentator explains 
to mean, the month, of which the root or cause (Mula) of being so called 
is the moon's being full in the constellation Jyeshtha: but it may be so 

r 

termed, perhaps, from the lunar asterism Mula, which is next to Jyeshtha, 
falling also within the moon's passage through the same month. 

06. This name is also read Tambamitra. One copy has Tava-mitraya, 'to thy 
friend,' as if it was an epithet of Dadhicha; but the construction of the 
verse requires a proper name. 'Bhaguri gave it to Tambamitra, and he to 
Dadhichi.' 

07. A different series of narrators has been specified in the first book. 

08. This seems to be an injudicious interpolation; it is not in all the copies. 

09. The words or prayers employed in presenting oblations with fire. 

10. The text has, ###. Mana commonly means 'pride,' but here it seems most 
appropriately rendered by its radical import, 'measure' the measures 
which are for the determination of measurable things are not applicable 
to Vishnu. 





