"'Yudhishthira said, "Sons and grandsons and brothers and sires and
fathers-in-law and preceptors and maternal uncles and grandsires, many
high-souled Kshatriyas, many relatives (by marriage), friends,
companions, sister's sons, and kinsmen, O grandsire, and many foremost of
men coming from diverse countries, have fallen. All these, O grandsire,
have been caused to be slain by myself alone, from desire of kingdom.
Having caused so many heroic kings who were always devoted to
righteousness and all of whom had quaffed Soma in sacrifices, what end
shall I attain, O great ascetic! Thinking that this earth has been bereft
of many lions among kings, all of whom were in the enjoyment of great
prosperity, I burn continually to this day. Having witnessed this
slaughter of kinsmen and millions of other men, I burn with grief, O
grandsire! Oh, what will be the plight of those foremost of ladies who
have been deprived of sons, of husbands, and of brothers. Reproaching the
Pandavas and the Vrishnis as cruel murderers, those ladies, with
emaciated features and plunged in grief, will throw themselves on the
earth! Not beholding their sires and brothers and husbands and sons,
those ladies, through affliction, casting off their life-breath, will go
to the abode of Yama, O foremost of Brahmanas! I have no doubt of this.
The course of morality is very subtle. It is plain that we shall be
stained with the guilt of slaughtering women for this. Having slain our
kinsmen and friends and thereby committed an inexpiable sin, we shall
have to fall into hell with heads downwards. O best of men, we shall,
therefore, waste our limbs with the austerest of penances. Tell me, O
grandsire, to what mode of life I should betake myself then."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Hearing these words of Yudhishthira, the
Island-born Rishi, having reflected keenly for some time, addressed the
son of Pandu as follows:

"'Vyasa said, "Remembering the duties of a Kshatriya, O king, do not give
way to grief. All those Kshatriyas, O bull among Kshatriyas, have fallen
in the observance of their proper duties. In the pursuit of great
prosperity and of great fame on earth, those foremost of men, all of whom
were liable to death,[109] have perished through the influence of Time.
Thou hast not been their slayer, nor this Bhima, nor Arjuna, nor the
twins. It is Time that took away their life-breaths according to the
great law of change. Time hath neither mother, nor father, nor anybody
for whom he is disposed to show any favour. He is the witness of the acts
of all creatures. By him have they been taken away. This battle, O bull
of Bharata's race, was only an occasion ordained by him. He causes
creatures to be slain through the instrumentality of creatures. This is
the manner in which it puts forth its irresistible power. Know that Time
(in his dealings with creatures) is dependent upon the bond of action and
is the witness of all actions good and bad. It is Time that brings about
the fruits, fraught with bliss or woe, of our actions. Think, O
mighty-armed one, of the acts of those Kshatriyas that have fallen. Those
acts were the causes of their destruction and it is in consequence of
them that they have perished. Think also of thy own acts consisting of
observances of vows with restrained soul. And think also how thou hast
been forced by the Supreme Ordainer to do such an act (as the slaughter
of so many human beings). As a weapon made by a smith or carpenter is
under the control of the person that is handling it, and moves as he
moves it, similarly this universe, controlled by actions done in Time,
moves as those actions move it. Seeing that the births and deaths of
creatures take place without any (assignable) cause and in perfect
wantonness, grief and joy are perfectly needless. Although this
entanglement of thy heart is a mere delusion, still, if it pleaseth thee,
O king, perform expiatory rites (for washing thyself free of thy
so-called sin). It is heard, O Partha, that the gods and the Asuras
fought against each other. The Asuras were the elder, and the gods the
younger brothers. Covetous of prosperity, fierce was the battle fought
between them. The fight lasted for two and thirty thousand years. Making
the earth one vast expanse of blood, the gods slew the Daityas and gained
possession of heaven. Having obtained possession of the earth, a (large)
number of Brahmanas, conversant with the Vedas, armed themselves,
stupefied with pride, with the Danavas for giving them help in the fight.
They were known by the name of Salavrika and numbered eight and eighty
thousand. All of them, however, were slain by the gods. Those
wicked-souled persons who desire the extinction of virtue and who set
sinfulness agoing deserve to be slain even as the furious Daityas were
slain by the gods. If by slaying a single individual a family may be
saved, or, if by slaying a single family the whole kingdom may be saved,
such an act of slaughter will not be a transgression. Sin, O king,
sometimes assumes the form of virtue, and virtue sometimes assumes the
form of sin. They, however, that are learned, know which is which.
Therefore, console thyself, O son of Pandu, for thou art well versed in
the scriptures. Thou hast, O Bharata, only followed the path formerly
trodden by the very gods. Men like yourselves never go to hell, O bull of
Pandu's race! Comfort these thy brothers and all thy friends, O scorcher
of foes! He who deliberately engages himself in sinful acts, and
committing sinful acts feels no shame but continues the same as before,
is called (in the scripture) a great sinner. There is no expiation for
him and his sins know no diminution. Thou art born in noble race. Forced
by the faults of others, thou hast most unwillingly done this, and having
done this thou repentest of it. The Horse-sacrifice, that grand rite, has
been indicated as an expiation for thee. Make preparations for that
sacrifice, O monarch, and thou shalt be freed from thy sins. The divine
chastiser of Paka, having vanquished his foes with the assistance of the
Maruts, gradually performed a hundred sacrifices and became
Satakratu.[110] Freed from sin, possessed of heaven, and having obtained
many regions of bliss and great happiness and prosperity, Sakra,
surrounded by the Maruts, is shining in beauty, and illuminating all the
quarters with his splendour. The lord of Sachi is adored in the heavens
by the Apsaras. The Rishis and the other gods all worship him with
reverence. Thou hast got the earth through thy prowess. All the kings
have been vanquished by thee, O sinless one, through thy prowess.
Proceeding with thy friends to their kingdom, O king, install their
brothers, sons, or grandsons on their thrones. Behaving with kindness
towards even the children in the womb, make thy subjects glad and happy,
and rule the earth. Install on their thrones the daughters of those that
have no sons. Women are fond of pleasure and power. Through this means
they will cast off their sorrows and become happy. Having comforted the
whole empire in this way, O Bharata, adore the gods in a Horse-sacrifice
as the virtuous Indra did in days of old. It is not proper for us to
grieve for those high-souled Kshatriyas, O bull of thy order (that have
fallen in battle). Stupefied by the power of the destroyer, they have
perished in the observance of the duties of their own order. Thou hast
discharged the duties of a Kshatriya and obtained the earth without a
thorn in it. Observe thy own duties, O son of Kunti, for then, O Bharata,
thou shalt be able to obtain happiness in the other world."'"

SECTION XXXIV-XXXV

"'Yudhishthira said, "After doing what acts does a man become liable to
perform expiation? And what are those acts which he must do for being
freed from sin? Tell me this, O grandsire."

"'Vyasa said, "Having omitted to do those acts that have been ordained,
and done those that have been interdicted, and having behaved
deceitfully, a man becomes liable to perform expiation. The person in the
observance of the Brahmacharya vow, who rises from bed after the sun has
risen or goes to bed while the sun is setting, one who has a rotten nail
or black teeth, one whose younger brother weds first, one who weds before
his elder brother is wedded, one who has been guilty of the slaughter of
a Brahmana, one who speaks ill of others, one who weds a younger sister
before the elder sister has been wedded, one who weds an elder sister
after having wedded a younger one, one who falls away from a vow, one who
slays any one of the regenerate classes, one who imparts a knowledge of
the Vedas to a person unworthy of it, one who does not impart a knowledge
thereof to a person that is worthy of it, one who takes many lives, one
who sells flesh, one who has abandoned his (sacred) fire, one who sells a
knowledge of the Vedas,[111] one who slays his preceptor or a woman, one
born in a sinful family, one who slays an animal wilfully,[112] one who
sets fire to a dwelling house, one who lives by deceit, one who acts in
opposition to his preceptor, and one who has violated a compact,--these
all are guilty of sins requiring expiation. I shall now mention other
acts that men should not do, viz., acts that are interdicted by both the
world and the Vedas. Listen to me with concentrated attention. The
rejection of one's own creed, the practice of other people's creed,
assisting at the sacrifice or the religious rites of one that is not
worthy of such assistance, eating of food that is forbidden, deserting
one that craves protection, neglect in maintaining servants and
dependants, selling salt and treacle (and similar other substances),
killing of birds and animals, refusal, though competent, to procreate
upon a soliciting woman, omission to present the daily gifts (of handfuls
of grass to kine and the like), omission to present the dakshina,
humiliating a Brahmana,--these all have been pronounced by persons
conversant with duty to be acts that no one should do. The son that
quarrels with the father, the person that violates the bed of his
preceptor, one that neglects to produce offspring in one's wedded wife,
are all sinful, O tiger among men! I have now declared to thee, in brief
as also in detail, those acts and omissions by which a man becomes liable
to perform expiation. Listen now to the circumstances under which men, by
even committing these acts, do not become stained with sin. If a Brahmana
well acquainted with the Vedas takes up arms and rushes against thee in
battle for killing thee, thou mayst proceed against him for taking his
life. By such an act the slayer does not become guilty of the slaughter
of a Brahmana.[113] There is a mantra in the Vedas, O son of Kunti, that
lays this down, I declare unto thee only those practices that are
sanctioned by the authority of the Vedas. One who slays a Brahmana that
has fallen away from his own duties and that advances, weapon in hand,
with intent to slaughter, does not truly become the slayer of a Brahmana.
In such a case it is the wrath of the slayer that proceeds against the
wrath of the slain. A person by drinking alcoholic stimulants in
ignorance or upon the advice of a virtuous physician when his life is at
peril, should have the regenerating ceremonies performed once more in his
case. All that I have told thee, O son of Kunti, about the eating of
interdicted food, may be cleansed by such expiatory rites. Connection
with the preceptor's wife at the preceptor's command does not stain the
pupil. The sage Uddalaka caused his son Swetaketu to be begotten by a
disciple. A person by committing theft for the sake of his preceptor in a
season of distress is not stained with sin. One, however, that takes to
thieving for procuring enjoyments for himself becomes stained. One is not
stained by stealing from other than Brahmanas (in a season of distress
and for the sake of one's preceptor). Only one that steals under such
circumstances without himself appropriating any portion thereof is
untouched by sin. A falsehood may be spoken for saving one's own life or
that of another, or for the sake of one's preceptor, or for gratifying a
woman, or for bringing about a marriage. One's vow of Brahmacharya is not
broken by having wet dreams. In such cases the expiation laid down
consists in the pouring of libations of clarified butter on the blazing
fire. If the elder brother be fallen or has renounced the world, the
younger brother does not incur sin by marrying. Solicited by a woman,
connection with her is not destructive of virtue. One should not slay or
cause to be slain an animal except in a sacrifice. Animals have become
sacred (fit for sacrifice) through the kindness manifested towards them
by the Creator himself in the ordinance laid down by him. By making a
gift in ignorance to an undeserving Brahmana one does not incur sin. The
omission (through ignorance) to behave with liberality towards a
deserving person does not lead to sin. By casting off an adulterous wife
one does not incur sin. By such treatment the woman herself may be purged
while the husband may avoid sin. One who knows the true use of the Soma
juice, does not incur sin by selling it.[114] By dismissing a servant who
is incompetent to render service one is not touched by sin. I have now
said unto thee those acts by doing which one does not incur sin. I shall
now speak to thee of expiation in detail."'"